Awami National Party’s
Elections Manifesto
2013

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

The purpose of this Manifesto is to inform the public about the aims and objectives of
the Awami National Party (ANP) so that voters in the forthcoming General Elections
will know clearly what the Party stands for. The manifesto does not purport to be a
detailed programme of action. It seeks only to describe the spirit that motivates the
Party and the overall principles that will govern its policies, should it be called upon
to serve the people of Pakistan, either singly or in partnership with others.
The Manifesto is divided into the following parts:The Preamble
I Internal Affairs
1.
Peace and Security
2.
Political, Legal and Administrative
3.
Social, Economic & Fiscal Reforms
4.
Provincial Autonomy
i.
Education
ii.
Health
iii.
Population Planning and Well-Being
iv.
Labour Rights and Development
v
Youth Development & Employment
vi
Agriculture
vii.
Environment
viii.
Industry & technical advancement
ix.
Art and Culture
x
Sports &Tourism
xi
Information and Technology
II. Human Rights
1.
Women’s Rights and Empowerment
2.
Children’s Rights
3.
Minorities Rights and Empowerment
4.
Old age and people with disabilities
III. Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)
IV.External Affairs

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

THE PREAMBLE
The Awami National Party (ANP) draws its inspiration from the example and
teachings of Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, affectionately known to his people as
Baacha Khan. With peace and non violence as his guiding principles, he spent his
entire life in the ceaseless and unrelenting struggle in the cause of freedom and
justice, and against all kinds of injustice, oppression and exploitation. He and his
Khudai Khidmatgars supplied the vanguard of the tremendously demanding fight for
the liberation of South Asia against the great imperial and colonial power of the day,
and rendered, in that path, sacrifices which were matchless and which have
remained a beacon for those who seek justice and rights. He aimed and strove not
only to liberate the masses of South Asia, particularly his own people, the Pakhtuns,
from the shackles of foreign domination, oppression and exploitation, but also to rid
his own people of the curse of poverty, ignorance, harmful customs and biases,
internal disharmony and political inertia. He wanted both political and social justice
for all peoples and nations, and wished that all peoples and nations should live in
freedom, with internal peace and justice, and with mutual accommodation and
cooperation on International level. In sum, in Bacha Khan’s scheme of things politics
and public service was two sides of the same coin.
In keeping with this spirit, the ANP, like its predecessors, the NAP (National Awami
Party) and the NDP (National Democratic Party), considers politics and public
service essentially as two complementary and indispensable branches of the same
activity. Hence, the party is dedicated to the promotion of democracy and freedom,
the eradication of poverty and ignorance, the protection of all basic human rights and
liberties, and the fulfilment of the genuine and legitimate aspirations of all groups and
strata of the society-particularly the weak, the disadvantaged and the dispossessed.
The ANP firmly believes in peace and non violence and stands against extremism
and violence in all its forms. It believes that dialogue is the best way to resolve all
issues.
The ANP is for equal opportunities for all citizens without discrimination and bias.
The ANP is committed to securing for all the federating units of Pakistan their full
political social and economic rights as equal partners in the federation and their full
share in the national progress and prosperity.
The ANP opposes parochial interpretation of religion and customs and uphold Bacha
Khan’s discourse of human dignity, pluralism and indigenous wisdom and identity
through large scale awareness movement.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

In the pursuit of these goals, the ANP is ready to work together with like-minded
forces in Pakistan and to subscribe to partnerships with all peace loving countries of
the world.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

I. Internal Affairs
The ANP considers extremism and terrorism a threat to the very existence of the
country. It has sacrificed more than 700 party members in the struggle for peace
and security in the past 5 years. The Party is committed to Peace in the country and
will not let the sacrifices of the people of Pakistan, security agencies and especially
ANP’s members go in vain.

1. Peace and Security
i. ANP will oppose all forms of violations of the country’s sovereignty and
integrity.
ii. ANP is committed to evolve a national consensus to transform the state from
a merely security state into a democratically developing welfare state.
iii. ANP believes security and foreign policies are the primary responsibility of the
public representatives. A process for review of the security and foreign
policies would be initiated both within the Parliament and outside to enable
the transformation of the state.
iv. ANP will ensure that state implements its writ in FATA and purge it from all
sorts of terror networks.
v. ANP will evolve a consensus on integration of FATA and PATA in the
mainstream, with a comprehensive political, social and economic reform plan;
vi. ANP will seek negotiations with all those who recognize the writ of the state
and renounce violence. However, those who are not prepared to do so will
face an effective and meaningful action.
vii. ANP believes in a holistic security approach and mechanism based on
professional and well coordinated intelligence organized on modern lines as a
key to addressing the root causes of extremism, sectarianism and terrorism.
ANP will review and reform the security policies and strategies to bring it in
line with modern security requirements.
viii. ANP will continue its efforts to establish and strengthen rule of law and justice
for all.
ix. ANP will evolve a standard policy for compensation, including a
comprehensive public insurance policy, for victims of sectarianism, terrorism
and violence. The policy will be extended to FATA where the people have
been hardest hit by terrorism and extremism..
x. ANP will establish a Martyrs Cell in the Provinces and FATA to ensure well
being of the families of the Martyrs of terrorism and extremism.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

2. Political, Legal and Administrative
ANP will strive for the establishment of a peaceful, prosperous, progressive and
liberal society based on the following:i.

ANP will continue to focus on strengthening the democratic process, rule of
law and access to justice.
ii.
ANP will continue its struggle against xenophobia and religious extremism
that is pushing the country into isolation and a closed society.
iii. ANP is committed to elimination of discrimination of any kind based on
race, religion, creed or gender. Every citizen of Pakistan shall have equal
rights and opportunities in the political, economic and social sense.
iv. ANP believes that every citizen shall have the right to hold any public office
including the offices of the President and Prime Minister.
v.
All discriminatory laws shall be repealed. The essence of security will be
guaranteed among the religious and ethnic minorities.
vi. ANP will ensure protection of the rights and identities of the peoples of the
four Provinces, FATA, Gilgit Baltistan, ensuring unrestricted freedom for the
development of their cultures and languages.
vii. ANP has consistently opposed all forms of oppression and violence against
the people of Balochistan. Simultaneously, ANP wants to ensure that the
Baloch and Pashtun along with other ethnic and social groups are
empowered and have fair share in the resources and governance in the
Province.
viii. ANP considers holding local government elections as a high priority for
strengthening the democratic process and improving access and quality of
services at the door steps. It will support and strengthen the Local
government system and ensure increase of women’s seats.
ix. Freedom of association and of speech shall be guaranteed, as shall the
freedom of and right to information in letter and spirit.
x.
ANP is committed to Provincial Autonomy with the centre retaining control
of defence, foreign affairs, currency, communications and such other
subjects which the federating units agree to in the Council of Common
Interest. ANP will ensure full implementation of the 18th Constitutional
Amendment, particularly with regards to oil, gas, water and power, energy,
health and education. ANP will build on policies of devolution of powers to
the Provinces that were started during the last 3 years.
xi. ANP believes in fair and just distribution of water resources particularly of
the Indus river system. It will strongly oppose usurpation of water rights of
the Provinces.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

xii.
xiii.

xiv.

xv.

xvi.

xvii.
xviii.

xix.

xx.
xxi.

xxii.

xxiii.

xxiv.

ANP is committed to rationalizing of defence expenditures to levels which
do not jeopardize economic and social welfare of the people of Pakistan.
Moreover it will ensure that the services of trained personnel of the armed
forces like doctors, teachers, engineers, skilled and semi-skilled workers
shall be utilized for productive purposes whenever and wherever required
and these services shall be performed on a non-profit basis.
ANP opposes any interference in politics by civil and military bureaucracy.
ANP upholds the basic principle that all institutions shall work within their
Constitutional limits.
ANP shall ensure Parliament and Parliamentary Committees role in
stringent accountability of the executive and in nominations and
endorsements of senior level positions especially ambassadors, judges of
the superior judiciary, chairperson and members of commissions and
boards of public corporations etc.
Federal civil servants posted to the Province will be appointed with the
consent of the Provincial government. The Provincial government will have
complete control over all officials serving in the Province.
At the Federal level, ANP will continue to strive for the Provinces rightful
share of appointments at all levels.
ANP shall strive for the abolishment of parallel legal and quasi-legal
systems so as to ensure a uniform, integrated judicial system in the
country.
ANP shall support efforts of federating units which wish to reorganize on
the basis of historic, cultural, linguistic and geographical similarities in
accordance with the constitution.
A comprehensive package of economic, social and legal measures shall be
proposed to protect workers, labour rights and interests.
ANP will ensure protection of rights, development and welfare of people
with disabilities. ANP shall strive for their meaningful participation in
decision making at all levels. It will make serious effort to improve safety
and accessibility for them in public and work places and will ensure
implementation of existing quotas in letter and spirit. .
Efforts shall be made to narrow the difference in salaries between the
highest and lowest paid government employees so as to reach an optimal
ratio of 5:1. Salaries, benefits and minimum wage shall be indexed to the
cost of living.
Contracting the services of retired government servants shall, as a rule, not
be allowed. Where it is essential, in the public interest, written reasons shall
be given and these shall be justiciable.
Benefits, subsidies and privileges granted to former rulers of States, their
dependents or other special classes of citizens shall be abolished.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

xxv. The elimination of bribery and corruption, black-marketing, smuggling and
other social evils shall be given the top-most priority and a permanent,
independent authority shall be established to enforce accountability’.
xxvi. The privacy of citizens in domestic matters and in communications shall be
ensured. Wire-tapping, censorship, and entry into private premises without
legal authority shall be prohibited.

3. Social, Economic & Financial Reforms
One of the primary duties of the state is provision of a better life for the people.
Political rights and freedoms have to be accompanied by advancement in the social
and economic spheres. Poverty, disease and illiteracy have to be eliminated and
social justice ensured. High population growth, huge non development and military
expenditures and heavy domestic and external debt servicing have contributed to the
low social, economic and human development indicators.
1.
Social and Economic Reforms
ANP will pursue social and economic policies along the following lines to address the
social and economic challenges faced by the country:
i.

ii.

iii.

iv.

v.

vi.
vii.

ANP considers evolving a political will and consensus imperative for setting
economic and institutional reforms agenda to effectively address the country’s
economic, social and energy crises.
ANP considers economic growth with equity between different social classes,
gender, rural and urban areas, and between the Provinces as indispensible
for eradicating poverty and improving human development indicators.
ANP will ensure the decisions of the Council of Common Interests in respect,
to hydel profits accruing to the Provinces is implemented in letter and
spirit.
In view of new oil and gas discoveries, particularly in Pukhtunkhwa, new
royalty rates will be negotiated to generate more resources for the
development of the Provinces in accordance with the 18th amendment of the
Constitution.
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Gas Company initiated by the ANP led Pakhtunkhwa
government shall be taken to its logical conclusion and similar initiatives will
be considered in other Provinces as well.
Alternate sources of energy including coal, run of the river, solar and wind
shall be explored.
Provincial resources were reduced, when the Federal Government took away
cantonment property taxes from the provinces without relieving it of the
responsibility for provision of infrastructure and services and the maintenance
of law and order. The federation will be urged to pay for these services
through the Council of Common Interest.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

viii.

ix.

x.
xi.
xii.

xiii.

xiv.

xv.

Many large organizations like the National Highway Authority, the Civil
Aviation Authority and others were taken out of the purview of the National
Economic Council. The result was that equity in distribution of funds and
projects cannot be maintained. ANP will bring these under the Council of
Common Interest to ensure equity.
The ravages of terrorism and extremism for several decades have damaged
the country‘s resource base and infrastructure, especially in FATA and
Pakhtunkhwa. ANP will strive for rehabilitation of natural resources and
infrastructure as a priority.
ANP will support public sector development and explore public private
partnership wherever possible to ensure cost effective and quality services.
ANP will encourage and protect foreign investment and offer special
incentives in this regard.
ANP will continue to develop safety nets in the line of Bacha Khan
Employment, Technical Training and Rural Development Schemes initiated by
the ANP led Pakhtunkhwa government and will replicate these programmes in
other Provinces.
ANP will focus attention on improvement of Industrial and agricultural
productivity through adoption of new technologies, more efficient techniques
for production, human resource development, and lower inflation.
Threats of extremism, terrorism and targeted killing have had negative
implications for the economy. ANP will continue its efforts to deal with the root
causes of violence, sectarianism and extremism to revive the economy;
Land grabbing in Gwadar and other parts of Balochistan, Karachi and other
parts of the country will be dealt with firmly and Provincial resources will be
developed in accordance with the will of the people.

2. Fiscal & Tax Reform
i.
ANP will increase the Tax to GDP ratio from the current low level to a
minimum of 15%.
ii.
To increase the tax base the party shall impose taxes that tap the
wealth and incomes of the rich rather than burden the less well to do.
Direct tax net will be increased to 70% and tax collection shall be
improved on a priority basis.
iii.
ANP believes that incomes from all sources should be taxed and any
exemptions provided should be abolished. Incomes from agriculture,
real estate dealings, defence related businesses, property of defence
personnel in cantonments and incomes from speculative markets etc
shall be brought in the tax ambit.
iv.
ANP will review government expenditures so that inefficiency, waste
and corruption is eliminated and transparency and accountability
ensured.
ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

v.

The debt burden has crippled the economy. Debt servicing has
become the single largest item of expenditure in the government
budget reflecting the combined impact of surge in the volume of
domestic and foreign debt, rise in domestic interest rates and
depreciation of rupee. The debt management strategy has ignored the
efficient and effective use of the borrowed funds. This is largely due to
corruption, capital flight, adverse impacts of loans on domestic savings
and spending on consumption rather than investment items. ANP will
address these challenge as follows:
1. Adhere to fiscal responsibility and debt limitation act;
2. Top priority would be given to payment of expensive debts to make the
overall burden manageable;
3. Write off or reschedule payments to improve the repayment problem;
4. Domestic savers and foreign investors would be encouraged to invest
in the country;
5. Maintain credit worthiness;
6. Diversify borrowing by investing in both short and long term securities;
7. Reduce trade deficit to a sustainable level and make special efforts to
boost the country’s exports and remittances;
8. Being an agro based economy, policy focus will be on the development
of agriculture and agriculture related businesses;
9. Trade deficit would be reduced mainly through reducing the existing
trust deficit and improving quality standards;
10. Expand regional trade in particular with Afghanistan. The present two
main road links (Torkham and Speen Boldak) are insufficient to cater
for the growing trade between the two countries. At least ten more
roads and rail links will be built to enhance bilateral trade;
11. Invest in different traditional crafts in the socio economically backward
areas of the country to enable workers to create employment for
themselves;
12. Expand the share of manufacturing sector from the present 19% of the
GDP to almost 30% within the next 10 years.
13. State corporations will be made more efficient, transparent and
corruption within these institutions will be dealt with severely.
14. Necessary steps will be taken to modernize the industrial sector to
reduce cost of manufacturing. Export duty will be decreased and
speculative business will be discouraged, besides developing an
infrastructure to bring back the economy on the right track;
15. ANP will ensure that the government assume responsibilities of
creating the right kind of incentive structures to stop the decline in
manufacturing output. Focusing mainly on quality of human capital

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

formation and building appropriate technological capabilities through
increased investments in industrial research and development;
16. Will ensure large scale investment in energy sector in collaboration
with the Provincial governments to kick start the development of hydel
power, gas and oil and other sources of energy in the country.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

4. Provincial Autonomy
i. Education
The education system of Pakistan suffers from the malaise of both access
and quality. Post 18th Amendment the State is obligated to provide free
education for boys and girls up to 16 years. ANP believes that education is
instrumental in dealing with the threats of terrorism, extremism and bigotry.
ANP led coalition Government in Pakhtunkhwa’s main focus in the past 5
years has been on improving access and quality of education.
To improve access to education for all ANP will work towards the
following:
1. Will allocate a minimum of 6% of GDP to education.
2. Will work to eliminate multiple systems of education that protect and
perpetuate class and feudal interests. Will work on a single system which
meets international standards.
3. Will build a monitored and accountable network of primary and secondary
schools in areas that are easily accessible to children especially girls.
4. Will ensure basic facilities in existing primary and secondary schools.
5. Will remain committed to rebuilding better all schools bombed by terrorists.
6. Will de-bureaucratize and decentralize educational governance and work
towards eliminating political interference and corruption in the education
sector.
7. Will establish education task force to provide oversight both in terms of
access and governance.
8. Classrooms and teachers students’ ratio will be rationalized.
9. All high schools will be upgraded to higher secondary schools (12 years of
education).
10. Will build on the existing concept of elected Parent Teacher Associations
(PTA) with financial freedom for infrastructure development and academic
audit to ensure participation of parents in achievement of academic
excellence in the Provinces.
11. Merit and need based scholarships will be available for public schools
students especially for girls students.
12. Special incentives will be given to students in remote districts.
13. ANP will ensure stringent regulation of private educational institutions.
14. Each district will have at least one college with degree awarding status
and each district will be provided opportunity to establish its own
university.
ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

15. Vocational centres providing market based skills will be established and
strengthened with certified staff in all sectors of local labour industry to
provide suitable options for students who are unable to acquire a
professional degree.
16. Universities will be declared centres of excellence in research offering MS,
PhD and other research projects with academic linkages with local and
international institutions.
17. Merit based research fellowships will be awarded to MS and PhD students
in public universities.
18. Provincial Higher Education Commissions will be established and
strengthened.
To improve quality of education ANP will ensure the following:
1. Will continue to review and purify curriculum from hate literature and
unwarranted glorification of wars so as to make it more creative and skills
oriented.
2. Civic, cultural, peace and environmental education will be made part and
parcel of all school curricula.
3. Curricula will incorporate local history and indigenous creative, aesthetic,
social, political and cultural icons and legends.
4. Will de-monopolize textbooks publication.
5. Teachers trainings will be based on research oriented modern concepts of
child centred education.
6. Assessment and evaluation (examination) will be rationalized and
computerized.
7. Education in mother tongue along with research oriented second language
and foreign languages will be taught.
8. Recruitment, evaluation and promotion of teaching faculty will be carried out
strictly on merit basis.
9. Regulation of private education institutions will be rationally and objectively
implemented.
10. Quality teachers training will be institutionalized and promotions linked to
training certification.
ii.

Health

1. ANP will ensure improved access and quality of health services for all
citizens. In this respect various options including insurance schemes,
regulation and/or support to the private health sector shall be considered.
2. ANP will allocate at least 6 percent of the GDP to health.
3. ANP will work towards decentralization of health services to bring them closer
to the door step with special emphasis on improvement of rural health
services.
ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

4. ANP’s emphasis will be on mother and child healthcare, provision of clean
drinking water and preventive medicines.
5. ANP will give emphasis on primary health care (PHC) and will provide firm
and good foundation for the establishment of secondary and tertiary care.
6. ANP will seek public and private sector partnership, particularly for primary
health care.
7. ANP will institute special health care insurance packages and incentives for
senior citizens.
8. ANP will ensure full participation of the community in primary health care and
will provide incentives for health staff especially those working in remote
areas.
9. ANP will focus on upgrading and better equipping BHU, RHC to provide good
foundation for the health delivery system.
10. Mortality and morbidity rates from common infectious diseases will be
reduced to minimum by providing preventive and curative basic measures at
the primary health care levels.
11. ANP will introduce family medical registration form and record keeping system
at each BHU and RHC levels. It will also introduce proper referral system of
medical cases to the secondary and tertiary care levels with proper
transportation facility on no loss no profit basis.
12. It will ensure continuous health education for all the health care staff i.e.
Doctors, Nurses, Paramedics and health technicians. ANP will setup district
level institutions for Nurses, male & female, paramedics and health
technicians training linked to District Hospitals.
13. ANP will ensure coordination between public health sectors i.e. Health
Department, Public Health Engineering, and industrial and environmental
departments.
14. It will ensure liaison between medical institutions, health departments, and
private health sectors to ensure a balance between demand and supply of all
health staff and health facilities.
15. ANP will ensure quality control and stringent regulation of private medical
services and institutions.
16. ANP will establish fully functional burn and trauma hospitals initially at
provincial headquarters and later at each divisional level.
iii. Population Planning and Well-being
ANP stands committed to ensuring well being of all citizens and to addressing
on a priority basis the rapidly increasing population and its adverse effects on
quality of life. The ANP led Pakhtunkhwa government passed comprehensive
women and child protection legislation. ANP is committed to the following:
1. Will ensure a holistic, cross sectoral and integrated approach to population
planning and well-being, linking programmes and initiatives with health,
education, nutrition, environment, skills development and poverty
eradication etc.;

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

2. Will ensure that public and private programmes are focussed on mother
and child’s health and well-being as of highest priority;
3. Will work towards stabilizing and reducing population growth to 1 percent
by 2020;
4. Will double the per capita expenditure on public sector spending on
population planning and well-being;
5. Will improve quality and access of services especially ensuring better rural
outreach for access to high quality birth spacing services.
6. Will institutionalize training of community women health workers and birth
attendants and link their services with the Basic Health Units;
7. Will ensure community support in implementation and monitoring of
programmes;
8. Will institutionalize a credible mechanism for research and monitoring at
the Provincial levels;
9. Will launch communication campaign addressing men, women, families
and community to promote mother and child health and well being;
10. Will extend social security and retirement benefits to support parents in
old age;
11. Will invest in skills development, recreational and employment
opportunities for the youth population.
iv. Youth Development & Employment
1. ANP is committed to youth development and creation of suitable employment
opportunities.
2. ANP will have special incentives for youth such as academic scholarships,
exchange visits and trainings both nationally and internationally.
3. ANP shall focus on skills development and vocational training at an early
stage.
4. ANP will also give special emphasis to providing opportunities to youth for
creative learning, art and culture, recreation and sports.
5. Special attention will be paid to addressing the problem of the educated
unemployed. Facilities like internship, placement bureaus and advisory
organizations will be provided to help them find jobs. Comprehensive projects
for self-employment would also be given a priority.
6. ANP will develop a cadre of youth volunteers in each district trained in
disaster mitigation and management.
v

Labour and Workers Rights

1. ANP believes trade unions are critical in protecting labour rights, safety
standards and in ensuring better living standards and opportunities for
ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

2.

3.
4.
5.

workers. ANP will continue to support trade unions and will review and
amend any laws that restrict formation or working of trade unions.
ANP is committed to the protection of rights of workers employed in the
informal sector and will ensure their rights to a safe working environment and
employment benefits.
ANP will ensure workers access to improved health care, education, skills
development and holidays.
ANP will revise and facilitate implementation of labour laws to ensure safe
and secure working environment in both formal and informal sectors.
ANP will regularly review and set minimum wage and workers benefits
comparable to cost of living and inflation rates.

vi. Agriculture, Livestock and poultry development
Agriculture sector is the single largest component of Pakistan’s GDP with 25
percent contribution. The progress of agriculture sector provides a sound base
for economic development. Approx. 50 per cent of the labour force is employed
in the agriculture sector and 70 per cent of population subsists on agriculture.
Hence Agriculture sector development will be of top priority.
1. Livestock is a major contributor in this sector. ANP will give special attention
to this sector because of its large scale impact on poverty reduction, nutrition
and economic growth.
2. Poultry farming has made positive gains in the country. Similarly, the sale of
dairy products and live animals for urban consumption are an additional
source of income for the farmer. ANP will take measures to build on this
strength in each of the Provinces. ANP will also promote hygienic processing
and packaging of poultry and dairy products for export purposes.
3. Potential of pastureland will be explored in each Province and exploited to
benefit the farmers.
4. Vast potential exists for diversification of agriculture into high value cash crops
like fruits, vegetables, flowers, edible oil and crops like olives etc. Incentives
will be given to grow these commercially.
5. Major reforms will be brought to develop wheat, maize and tobacco. Industries
based on these products will be developed.
6. Modern farming techniques will be introduced especially techniques that help
reduce the use of water for irrigation purposes.
7. Will encourage and invest in agriculture research and development.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

vii.

Industrial & technical advancement

1. ANP will accelerate large scale industrial development. Investment will be
promoted especially in industries based on oil and gas, water and power and
alternate energy sources.
2. Large scope exists in the extraction and polishing of marble, gemstones and
mineral processing. ANP will encourage investment in these industries.
3. Special emphasis will be laid on food preservation and processing industry so
as to increase the incomes of fruit and vegetable farmers.
viii.

Art and Culture

1. Will preserve and promote cultural heritage through a comprehensive culture
mapping.
2. Will expand space for creative cultural expression through encouraging
cultural practitioners, art and literary organizations.
3. Will promote indigenous sports, folklore and indigenous languages through
establishment of Arts Councils and Community Cultural Associations.
4. Will introduce Culture Education into public education.
5. Will encourage, support and promote fine arts, performing arts and visual
media, as part of a wider cultural legacy in a historical as well as
contemporary context.
6. ANP will encourage thoughts and aspirations of artists, intellectuals, poets
writers, artisans, architects and all others related with cultural activities while
retaining the integrity of cultural diversity in different parts of the Provinces.
7. ANP will study the devastation inflicted on indigenous culture by extremism
and terrorism and will take effective steps for its rehabilitation and restoration.
8. Will take necessary steps for protection of sites of spiritual significance and
highlight respect and reverence for all belief systems, religions and sects.
9. Will encourage civil society’s cultural initiatives like cultural exchange
programmes, exhibitions and growth of public-private partnerships to support
arts and culture.
10. Will discourage copyright piracy, provide material incentives, employment,
support and exposure, in view of competitive global trends eroding local art,
culture and values.
11. Will continuously make efforts to develop and strengthen the implementation
framework for Culture Policy with a view of the post 18th amendment scenario,
including setting up of administrative machinery and funding allocation for
annual plans and recurring positions.
ix.

Environment

1. ANP will lay special emphasis on the protection of our natural environment
and promotion of biodiversity.
2. Will ensure improved access to clean air, drinking water, waste management
systems, sanitation and open spaces.
ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

3. ANP will also urgently address the problems of safe disposal of hospital,
industrial and other toxic waste.
4. ANP will focus on improvement of urban waste management system.
5. ANP will increase the safe drinking water supply coverage and increase
sanitation facilities.
6. Will double the forest cover including state-owned, private forest and
farmlands, as percentage of the total land area.
7. High priority will be given to cleaning of rivers.
8. Will increase land area protected for the conservation of wildlife.
9. Provincial Environmental Protection Agencies & tribunals will be strengthened
to effectively monitor and act against environmental violations.
10. ANP will focus on fuel efficient, comfortable, reliable and low cost intra and
inter-city public transport system.
11. ANP will proactively explore and support alternate energy sources especially
solar and run of the river energy.
x.

Sports &Tourism

1. Sports facilities and activities will be made compulsory in all schools and
colleges for both boys and girls.
2. Provincial, National and International sports tournaments will be facilitated
and their security ensured.
3. Sports and recreational complexes will be set up in all districts with special
facilities for women.
4. ANP will promote traditional and local sport.
5. ANP will encourage public-private partnership in protecting, restoring and
promoting heritage and religious sites.
6. ANP will invest in infrastructure and security to facilitate and encourage
tourism in the country.
xi.

Information and Communication

1. ANP is committed to freedom of expression and right to information and
communication.
2. ANP will bring transparency in blocking and censorship policies.
3. ANP will legislate to ensure right to information and communication.
4. ANP will facilitate Provincial governments in setting up and running Provincial
television channels and radio stations independently.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

II.

Human Rights
1. Women’s Rights and Empowerment

Pakistan’s women are trapped in a web of dependency and subordination due to
their low social, economic, and political status. The majority of women suffer from all
forms discrimination and violence. There are inherent structural impediments that
prevent and discourage women from participating in the decision making process
and this perpetuates their disadvantaged status. Although Pakistan has made
commitments at the National and International levels to ensure women’s rights, there
is a wide gap between commitment and implementation.
The ANP is committed to gender equality. In light of its vision, constitution and
policies, the party will work towards ensuring women’s rights and empowerment
through the following:
1. Will continue efforts to increase Women’s Participation in decision-making
at all levels to a minimum of 33% representation in Political Parties,
Parliament, Provincial Assemblies, local government, public services,
superior judiciary, public commissions and boards etc.
2. Will evolve consensus on direct elections for women to all elected
positions including on reserved seats/quota, as the party believes that
there is no substitute for direct elections.
3. Will provide women meaningful and requisite technical and financial
support to enable them to participate effectively in all spheres of life.
4. ANP pledges equal access and opportunities to employment for women
and will take effective administrative steps to ensure implementation of the
existing 10% quota for women.
5. Will ensure effective implementation of legislations enacted for women’s
rights and empowerment.
6. Will continue efforts to repeal all discriminatory laws and policies that
infringe on the equal rights of women and their participation in decision
making within the state, family, community and society.
7. Will continue efforts for the promulgation of the pending domestic violence
legislation and trafficking in women.
8. Will comply with existing international conventions/instruments ratified by
Pakistan addressing violence against women and ratify the Optional
Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
other relevant instruments relating to trafficking of women and children and
violence against women.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

9. Will ensure that no Laws, Regulations, Policy and Code of conduct
prescribed and adopted by the State exclude and/or discriminate against
women.
10. Review and revise identification policies to ensure that citizens are
identified by parentage and not spouse so that their national identity cards
do not change with a change in marital status. Remove the need for a
male guardian for adult women when applying for National Identity Cards.
11. Will create awareness about the importance of gender equality through
education and media.
12. ANP is committed to taking concrete steps to combat Gender Based
Violence (GBV) and the concomitant reforms and adjustment in rules and
regulations within the government system for horizontal linkages and
coordination mechanisms among concerned departments.
13. ANP will expand and improve the protection and welfare institutions of
survivors of GBV in the face of rising incidents and current inadequate
systems.
14. Will strengthen the relevant Ministries and Departments for Women
Development in the Provinces post the devolution of the Ministry of
Women Development. Strengthening in terms of professional, technical
and financial requirements for its challenging agenda of women
empowerment.
15. Will make the existing Provincial Commission on the Status of Women
(KP) autonomous (financially and administratively) and ones to be set up
in the other Provinces to make them an effective autonomous forum for
raising and following up on women’s issues. .
16. Will prohibit deals between local elders and political parties that bar
women from exercising their right to vote and/or contest.
17. Ensure administrative reforms within civil, judicial and police, for effective
implementation of existing laws, especially for women rights to inheritance,
elimination of customary discriminatory practices of child marriages,
swara, ghag, vani, etc. Encourage recruitment of women in the judicial
system at the level of Readers and Moharirs especially along with the
needed recruitment as judges in the higher courts.
18. Acknowledge the role of civil society and CSOs as contributory and useful
partners in promotion of women advancement in all walks of life including
legislation for women, political education and participation and poverty
reduction projects.
2.2.

Child Rights

Children under-18 years, constitute around 50% of Pakistan’s population. The
18th Constitutional Amendment as introduced in April 2010, inserted article 25-A
in the Constitution which promised free and compulsory education to all children
of the age of five to 16 years in such manner as may be determined by law.
ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

1. Education after the Eighteenth Amendment is a fundamental right of each and
every child in Pakistan. It is binding on the State to protect and promote this
right. ANP will ensure full implementation and adherence to article 25-A.
2. ANP will review, legislate and implement child labour laws to ensure that child
labour under the age of 16 years is prohibited in all formal and informal
sectors including domestic sector.
3. ANP is committed to implementation of the Juvenile Justice System and will
establish exclusive juvenile courts and introduce exclusive prisons with
immense rehabilitation possibilities for the children.
4. ANP will make efforts to prohibit all forms of violence against children such as
corporal punishment, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping and ensuring
punishment as per law.
5. ANP will strengthen the National Human Rights Commission with Provincial &
District Chapters in collaboration with the Provincial Governments to monitor
the status of child rights in the country.
2.3.

Minorities Rights

1. The misuse of religion in politics has strengthened and reinforced violent
conflicts over the others version of religion. ANP will continue its struggle for a
secular democratic & pluralistic Pakistan with equal rights and opportunities
for all citizens.
2. ANP will continue efforts to repeal amendments made to the 1973
Constitution mainly by dictators relegating religious minorities to a secondary
status.
3. ANP will make effort to review and remove all discriminations against religious
minorities in the Constitution and the law and will ensure affirmative action to
integrate religious minorities as equal citizens.
4. Incitement to violence against citizens of other ethnicity, faith and religions will
be prohibited.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

III. The Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)
The Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan (FATA) have an area of 27,000
square kilometers and a population of approx. 10 million. This region is administered
by the President under Articles 246 and 247 of the Constitution. Pakistani laws are
not applicable, the jurisdiction of the superior courts has not been extended and the
inhabitants do not enjoy fundamental rights as guaranteed by the Constitution.
The tribes remain the victim of poverty and the lowest social indices in the country.
The literacy rate is only 17% versus the national average of 45%. Female literacy is
an abject 3% versus 32% for the rest of the country.
The region has suffered the most serious dislocation due to conditions in
Afghanistan ever since 1979. Extremist elements have sought refuge in parts of
FATA and have, unfortunately, succeeded in imposing themselves on the tribes.
Development work has virtually ceased, the administration has collapsed and the
normal method of mediation through the jirga is not being utilized properly.
FATA has been a victim of devastating armed conflict between extremist insurgents
and state security apparatus. The people of FATA, particularly women and children
are caught in the cross fire. Those who have been pushed out of their homes and
living in IDP camps are suffering from numerous challenges and denied the right to a
normal life, access to education and health.
ANP proposes the following actions to reverse the present dangerous trends.
1. Political changes
In order to finish the under-development and the violent nightmare of the
tribesmen ANP will continue its efforts along the following lines:
i.
ii.

iii.
iv.

Will evolve consensus to urgently determine and settle the administrative
status of FATA in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the people.
ANP will struggle for due representation of FATA in the Pakhtunkhwa
Provincial Assembly with proportionate representation on reserved seats for
women. If voted to power ANP will ensure meaningful representation of FATA
in the Provincial cabinet.
ANP will amend the constitution to mainstream FATA, bring it under the
Parliament’s ambit and ensure equal rights and opportunities for the people.
ANP will also amend the constitution to ensure that the Pakhtunkhwa
Governor can be a registered voter of FATA and/or Pakhtunkhwa.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

v.

vi.

vii.
viii.

ix.

x.

As an immediate measure the FCR will be amended to provide human right
protection as laid down in the Constitution. Other provisions of the FCR will
also be amended to permit oversight by a special bench of the Peshawar High
Court.
Fully empowered local bodies will be instituted with adequate representation
of women, for a meaningful participation of the people of FATA in all their
affairs.
ANP will work for the dignified return of FATA IDPs to their homes and
rehabilitation of their lives and livelihoods.
ANP will evolve a comprehensive compensation package for families who
have had loved ones killed and whose homes and livelihoods have been
destroyed in armed conflicts and terrorism.
ANP will ensure implementation of the right to vote for the tribal population
particularly women and families who have been displaced and are living in
camps.
Population faced with severe security risks due to armed conflicts and terrorist
threats will be facilitated to use their right to vote in adjacent settled areas
and/or in camps.

2. Developmental reforms
ANP proposes the following measures for immediate implementation to bring
a peaceful and a positive change in FATA.
i.
ii.
iii.

iv.

ANP will ensure that state implements its writ in FATA and purge it from all
sorts of terror networks.
Since there are no reliable statistics a detailed survey and investigation of the
development potential of the area is essential.
ANP endorses the principles of development outlined in the Sustainable
Development Plan for FATA but proposes more active implementation
through empowerment of local communities.
Generally speaking ANP will follow the same development strategy for FATA
as for the Pakhtunkhwa Province, though FATA will be accorded special
treatment because of its abject poverty and poor indices.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

IV.

External Affairs

Pakistan owes its importance in the world to a number of factors, not all of its own
making. Its geo-strategic location is often cited as a primary one, but in fact, it is a
mixed blessing. Pakistan borders on four countries, each of which has played or
continues to play a major part in international affairs. These countries are China,
India, Iran and Afghanistan. Pakistan’s proximity to these States makes it a useful
tool for powerful countries to exploit it for their own global interests and, while this
can be turned to advantage, it can also pose a threat to the country’s independence
and freedom of action. The country’s foreign policy has, therefore, to be finely
adjusted to guard against these dangers while, at the same time, it must serve to
further the national interest in terms of economic and commercial progress. Keeping
this in view, ANP will work for a independent Foreign Policy which contains the
following elements:
i.
ii.

iii.
iv.
v.

vi.

vii.

Friendly and peaceful relations with all countries, particularly with neighbours.
Compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and full participation in all
its developmental and peace-keeping activities. Similarly Pakistan should take
part in the work of other international organizations of which it is a member. In
particular, it should actively engage in international efforts to promote an
equitable international order. It should also support international moves for
arms reduction and abolition of nuclear weapons on a universal and non
discriminatory basis.
Promotion of the concept of a multi polar world which would avoid universal
domination by one or two major powers.
Use of diplomacy as a tool for promoting the country’s economic and trade
interests, diversifying its market and attracting foreign investment.
Special attention to be paid to relations with Afghanistan. In view of the
commonalities in culture, faith, language and history between people of
Pakistan particularly Pukhtunkhwa and Balochistan and those of Afghanistan.
Determined efforts shall be made to promote cooperation in every field
including economic, commercial, educational and cultural. Bilateral relations
shall be conducted strictly on the basis of sovereign equality and non
interference in each other’s internal affairs.
Similarly, establishment of peaceful, cooperative good neighbourly relations
with India will be given high priority. All issues including Jammu and Kashmir
and other outstanding issues would be solved through peaceful negotiations
and open dialogue shall become the hallmark of bilateral relations.
Establishment of peaceful and cooperative relations with Iran, Russia and
Central Asian republics will be actively pursued on the basis of sovereign
equality and non interference in each other’s internal affairs.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

viii.
ix.

x.
xi.
xii.

xiii.

The traditional close relations with China will be maintained and further
developed.
ANP will strive for normalcy in the relations with the United States based on
mutual interests and respect as independent and sovereign states. It will
avoid fluctuating policies that border on extreme reactions of either abject
surrender or threats of armed conflict.
Relations with the European Union will be further developed and
strengthened.
Pakistan shall play a leading and constructive role in the Organization of
Islamic Conference, SAARC and ECO.
Special attention will be paid by our missions abroad to the problems of
expatriate Pakistanis, particularly in the Gulf countries and Saudi Arabia
where there are many Pakhtun workers.
Pakistan will encourage the seeking of political solutions to political problems
rather than the use of force.

ANP’s Elections Manifesto 2013

