 

Manifesto

Jamaat- --e Islami Pakistan

4? WM

ES J .
'

 

H . u 1* F. I. 1'

 

i“! "n WNW "i”! 11*

 

 

 

   

Issued: March 2013

Manifesto

Jamaat—e-lslami Pakistan

Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan
Mansaurah Lahore (Pakistan)

P11: 342-3541952324, 35432391, Fax: 342-35432194
Email: amir@ji.0rg.pk. Uri: www.jamaatﬂrg

m JIP ﬂﬁimal @JIPErl'fi-zial

 

 

 

rllg

Q
“wm‘

 

Published by:

Deptt. Of Public Relations

Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan
Mansoorah Lahore (Pakistan)

Manifesto

Jamai-e-Islami Faklatan

Ph: 042—3541952324, 35432391,
Fax: 0&2—35432194
Email: amlr@ji.0rg.pk, Url: wwjamaatorg

i] JiF ﬂﬁiﬂial . @JIPﬂﬁiﬂial

 

 

 

 

#Lg-i ’3 E'E'g-ﬁ’JPF-gjaal' 5:

H-

3s);

:Ullaii: E&MwiJIJMb1;&QH¢Ui
(ehﬁ. LJJIJ tiéiﬁfo 5'3"

Indeed, Allah eemmende you to render trusts to whom they are due
and when you judge be’meen people to judge with justice. Excellent is
that which Allah instructs you. Indeed, Allah is ever Hearing and Seeing.

EE;EJH;WE’MHHLNJJY1fP+§JJ1£4.31

g_§1¢

J;'§13J:LPAL:3I 2M1. éijéajgdjﬁdb'ujfpi
(mmran)

[And they are] these who. ii We give them authority in the tend, establish
prayer and give zakah and enjeih what is right and forbid what is wrong.
And to Allah belongs the outcome of [all] matters.

nlr
II

 

 

  

W
Manifesto

Jmut-a-Isiami Paﬂatan

r~ 1' 1m-- mi

I l" 3"?" 'i- _
1-H.- "3'. i'dfTﬂfg' -~ :
. ' uni "'__ _ 1-. II! 'I‘ J”
.La V. .I, .. _ ﬂ \ I Hi .1.
“I - Mmll-I Inn

 

 

 

-I I

  

LMW"?
Manifesto

Jamat-e-Ielami Paklemn

Manifesto Committee

A eemmittee comprising of following indiyiduale was enacted by
central exeeutiye eeuneil ih their meeting held eh16-18 May 2003.

Prof. Khureheed Ahmed {Chairman}
Dr. Farid Ahmed Paraeha (Secretary)
Ch. Rehmat Ilahi

Mr. Siraj-ul-Haq

Mr. Liequat Baleeh

Mien Maqeeed Ahmed

Pref. Muhammad Ibrahim

M r. Asadullah Bhutto

Dr. Syed Waeeem Akhtar

Abdul Meteen Akhundzada
Maulane Abdul Haq Heehmi
Muhammad Hussein Mehanti

Syed Waqas Jafri

SardarZafar Hussein Khan

Pref. Muhammad Waqae

M uhammacl Owaie Qaeim

M ushtaq Ahmed Khan

Dr. Sameeha Flaheel Qazi

Mrsﬁafia Sarwar

a Jemaat'e menifeete wee eppreyed by the central executiye eeuneil
in their meeting held eh 23—30th June 2011.

Ia Syed Munewer Heeah, Ameer Jamaet—e—Ieiem Pakistan, Launched
dameet'e mehifeete at a press eenferenee on 4th October 201 1 .

 

 

 

Table of Contents

1 PREFACE ....................... 115
2 THE ISLAMIC STATE AT MADINA

AN IDEFIL TU STHI‘U'E FDR ........... [19
3 SOVEREIGN, 1NDEPENDENT

AND DIGNIFIED PAKISTAN ........... 1i]
4 CURBFNG TERRORISM

AND LAWLESSNESg ............... 11

5 ABULITIUN 0F FEUDAL SYSTEM AND
INTRODUETIDN OF AGRICULTURAL

REFORMS ....................... 12
E CURBFNG INFLATION ............... 13
1' UVEHCDMING ENERGY BHISIS ........ 14
3 JOBS FOR EVERYONE .............. 15
3 HUME FOR ALL ................... 15
1D JUSTICE FOR ALL ................. 1E

11 EHADICATIUN 0F CDRRUPTiUN 3:
RECOVERY OF ILL—GDTFEN WEALTH . . . 1?

12 EDUCATION ...................... 13
13 YOUTH ......................... 19
14 HEALTH CARE .................... 21}

15 PROTECTION OF WOMEN RIGHTS ..... 21

1E ECDNDMIGPULICT................22
1? LABUFt-FRIEHDLY POLICIES AND

PHIVHHZATIUN ................... 23
13 PROTECTION OF SENIOR, DISABLED

AND SPECIAL CITIZENS ............. 24
13 CARE DF DOWN-THDDDEN

AND AFFLECTED .................. 25
2D SUBML REFORMS ................. 2B
21 DEFENCE POLICY ................. 21"
22 MEDIA PULIC‘rr .................... 28
23 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ......... 29
24 MINORITIES' RIGHTSr .............. 30
25 LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ............. 3D
26 THiBAL AREAS ................... 31
2? SPEEIAL BALUBHISTAN PACKAGE ..... 32
23 CONSTITUTIONAL REFORMS ......... 33
2Q JOIN US ........................ 35

 

 

  

LMiI-‘J‘
Manifesto

Jemaat—eisla rni Pakistan

II We will make Pakistan

peaceful and prespereus.

II We will upreet rampant
eerruptien and
lawlessness.

II We will free the country
item USES slavery and
restore Pakistan's
sovereignty.

 

DIE

PREFACE

Pakistan is passing through the worst phase ef its history. Peace, a
fundamental need ef a seeiety, is elusiye; erirnes, murders anti kidnappings are
rampant. Plunder is routine, especially in itlarael'ii+ Baiuehistan. tribal areas, and
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Government is evidently berth helpless and insensitive.
Eeenemy is in a tailspin. People are grueling under high leyels of unemployment and
eyer-rising inﬂation. Power blackouts. rising prices of gasoline, and short supplies of
natural gas hays made life miserable. The rulers, their eeelitian partners, and the
bureaucracy are all robbing national wealth. Each izlayr a new scandal eemes te fere
and there is he aseeuntability. Bribery is growing without cheek. PIA, Pakistan
Railways, and Pakistan Steel Mills are piling up huge losses. Banks ten are being
plundered.

Lewdness and immedesty are being premeteti in an organized manner te
depraye the youth; and there is he check on it. Seeietai yieleriee is spreading and,
ironically, law-enfereen'ient agencies haye became a threat to the litres and
properties of people. in addition to this? the specter efterrerism is targeting mosques.
places of worship. shrines. markets. reads and neighberheeds. Our seeurity
erganizatiens and their installments are its yietim tee. Ne place or indiyiduai is safe.
The natianisina state efsheek.

Our eeuntry has fallen into the clutches of American interests in the region.
Its espionage apparatus is spread all ever the eeuntry and we have been ehliged te
yield to its summaries like a slave. Our rulers haye turned the army on its own people
by asserting ownership ef a fereign war. America and its erenies haye ereded
Pakistan's seyereighty and are freely carrying eut their activities inside the eeuntry.
Drone attacks have intensified. Oh eur protests instead of offering an apology.
Washington hluntiy declared that attacks weulizi eentinue. And tauntingly reminds us
that we must tolerate all this since we reeelye dollars from them. It is a condition that:

Whole of my body is full 01 injuries.
Where should I apply the balm and where net?

The nation ﬁnds itself in a quagmire from which there seems to he no escape. History
testiﬁes that the rise and the fall of nations depends en their leadership. If leadership
is sincere. henest, eernpetent, selﬂess. and ambitious. natiens rise; they, heweyer,
fall if leadership is eppertunistiei self~seeking, dependent. and power seeking. When
leadership laeits integrity, sincerity, and respect fer law, even the best laws and
eenstltutiens fail to dellyer. But when leadership is sincere and determined. it not only
preyides a pre—peeple geyernment and dispenses justice, but it also leads people to
presperity.

 

 

Electiens are the primary and important mechanism that prayides
leadership. A ycte is a trust and it is the sale cppcrtunity ayailable tc pecpie tc select
their representatives. It must he understood that if ycters dc nct exercise their right
judiciously, and petty-interests, ccmmunity-bcnds or any other pressure inﬂuence
their yeting, then they cannct ahsclye themseiyes from the responsibility at the
haves wreught ahcut tiy pheny leadership.

Voters are fully respcnsihle fer bringing leaders — gccd or bad — ta pcwe r.

if ycters. under the influence at their petty interests, ccrnrnunal feelings. and
regional and linguistic parcehialism are unabie to distinguish between gacd and bad
leadershipi then they are destined tc hays a leadership that they are forced to
endure new and cchsequently there will hat be an late at a change in their ccnditian.
if ycters, in the interest at the ccuntry {cf which they are the mast irnpcrtant
stakeholders} elect sincere and upright indiyidualsi cnlyr then will they have gccd
leadership.

in our country. democracy ancl elections have degenerated intc pursuit cf
pcwer anti perscnal interests, Whereas. electicns are a means at naticn building.
only these can achieve this goal who are net in pursuit of any wcrldly gain far
themselves. Witheut exception, all the prophets of Allah in carrying cut their mission
told their people:

“I dc nct askcfycu any reward frcrn thee; my reward is with Allah."

Unless such selfless leadership is available tc usr we will not be able in sclye any cf
cur prcblen'is.

With electicns just arcund the ccrner, ycu will he tested in what kind at
leadership you elect. A crcwd is in the ﬁeld pleading far yeur yctes. They hate catchy
slcgans anti make tall claims. Mcst at them are these to whcn'i Al-Cturan says: "why
tic you say whatyau dc hctdc?”{ﬁ1:3).

Jarnaa t-e-lslan'ii is net merely a pclitical. religicuscr retcrrnist party.

It is an itteclcgical party which believes in ccrnpiete. all-emhracing antl
ccmprehensiye Islamic way at life and wishes to implement it in eyery sphere at life.
Jamaat understands that decadence in the world is due to its indifference tcwarcls
Allah's commandments and belief in the Day at Judgment, and ayciding the
guidance preyitied by the Prcphet {PBUH}. 1I.I"l.-'heneIiIerthere is a prchlem in any
discipline cf life, this ncnchalant hehayicr is the rest cause. Na refcrn'i is pcssihle
without unconditional submission to Allah, a concern for accountability in the
Hereafter. and the chedience tc His prcphets. Any etfcrt tc establish a just scciety en
the basis of same materialist icleclcgy wcuid cnly result in a new term cftyranny.

 

 
 

h- “I

MI
Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

  

A vote is a trust and it
presides an ccccrtunlty
ta the panels tc select
their representatiyes.

If waters. in the interest at
the ccuntry {at which they
are the meet important
stakeholders} elect
sincere and upright
lndiyiduals. enly then we
will haye gccd
leadership.

 

ﬂ?

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

Jamaat—e-lslami
prcfesses a ccncept at
life which is ali-embracing
and aims at the welfare
of the humankind.

Tc achieve its objectives.
Jamaat-e-lslami intends
is bring changes in the
political system
peacefully thrcugh
cchstituticnal and
demacratic means.

 

03

 

Jamaatelslarrii prefesses a concept of life which is all—erntiracing and aims
at the welfare cf the humankind. It. hcweyer, believes that until we build cur ccantry
intc a model Islamic state. unless we ourselves tcllcw the system we profess as true
and just and show to the we rid the results of implementing this system in our country,
we will net be able tc ccnyince cthers at its strength and eﬁectiyeness.

We understand that there is nc dearth at these in the ccuntry whc believe in
Aliah, His Prophets. and the Day of Judgment. But the anemaly is that the faith and
the system in which the majcrity of people of Pakistan believe in are net in farce in
the cctintry. For this yery reascn. cur ccuntry, despite being a preacminantly Muslim
state, has neither been able to beneﬁt from the blessings c1 Islam nor has it been abie
tc became a medal at practicality anti truthfulness cf Islam in the camity cf naticns.

Jarnaat-e-lsianii is pursuing all ccssible means tc address this situaticn.
Propagation of Islam. ridding the scciety cf fallacies cf traditions bath bid and new,
apprcaching intelligentsia an haw Islam preyides sclutlcns is cur problems, and
endeaycr tc refcrm the rncral yalues cf the scciety are the ccmpenents cf the
program Jamaatelsiami is working on since its creation seyenty years age. In
additicn is this. the circumstances alsc demand restructuring cf gcyernment.
Especially in the modern era when eyery sphere at life falls within the ambit cf
gcyemment, and it exercises authority in eyery walk at life.

Witheut reforming the system at gayernment, neither reformation of
individuals is pcssible ncr can justice prevail in the scciety.

A corrupt gayernment is net cniy an impediment tc reforms. but it alsc
becomes the catalyst far all evil forces in the scciety.

Ne matter hcw fenrentlyI the suppcrters at an lslamic system striye thrcugh
apolitical means, they cannot achieve their objectives when the reins of the
gcyernn‘ient are in the hands at these whc are explciting the ccuntry's rescurcea
ccntrclling the farce cf the law, and directing the state machinery tc tiriye the ccuntry
inwards a capitalist er sccialist I:iIrIcler; an un-lslarnic way of life.

Tc achieye its ebjectiyes, Jamaat‘e—lslami intends to bring changes in the
pclitical system peacefully through ccnstituticnal anti deniccratic means. The gcal
betere the Jamaat is tc stear the ccuntry intc a state that strictly adheres is- the
injunctions cf the Quran and the Sunnah and fcllews the gcyernance system of the
rightly guided Caliphs (al-Khulafa‘u r-Rashidin} in which the principles cf Islam are
fully enforced.

Workers at Jamaat—e—lslami are aisc approaching you far your Irate.
Theretcre, tc refresh ycur memcry, and tar these whc are net aware at car prcgrarn,
we wish tc bring ta ycur khcwled ge the fcllcwing merits cf .la ma at-e-lslami:

 

 

Jamaat+e+islami has never been alone at the helm at ccuntry's affairs, but it has
always seryeti the ccuntry in eyery walk at life and its leadership and its wcrkers hays
relentlessly been sewing its people. Whenever and to whichever extent it get the
opportunity is share power, its conduct and performance have been exemplary. In
2002. Jamaat shared power in the preyince cf Khyber Pakhtunkhwa as a junicr
partner. It held the maycr-ship of Karachi thrice. People are witness to the superior
perfcrniance at its ministers. Even its stanch cppcnents atirnit excellent eerrcrrnance
chamaat in maycr-ship cf Karachi.

The heart at the matter is that during the periods Jamaat-e-lslarni was in
power, he one, eyeh its swcrn cppcnents cculti accuse its ministers, mayors, cr
parliamentarians cf ccrrupticn cr misccnduct. Ncne cf its elected members ever get
any persbnal gains.

in the same spirit, Ai-Khidmatfcundaticn is running Pakistan's largest public
welfare netwerk preyitziing education and healthcare facilities to the pear and needy
thrcughcut the ceuntry.

1I.I'I.-'hereas we are thankful to Allah icr cur ccntributicns is the welfare cf the
scciety ,we appeal to the naticn to make chelces an the bases at performance of
candidates while casting their yctes, remaining mindful cf the fact that they are
answers ble tc Allah far all their decisions.

Manifestc cf Jamaat—e-lslami is in year hands. It will help ycu acquaint
ycurselyes with the program at Jamaat and understand the positions it takes an
natienal issues.

Jamaatue-lslami keeps premises it makes. It has the leadership that can
implement its manifests. It is capable cf pulling the ccuntry cut at the quagmire it
presently is in. its leadership and wcrkers are un—wayering, competent, sincere and
hﬂl‘lEEt-

Tcday we need a leadership that can free the naticn frcm the clutches cf
tcreign dcrninance and restore its scyereignty .make the country self-sufficient,
maintain lawantl crder. and pull the ccuntryeutefﬁnancial crises.

Such is the program chamaaterlarni.

The performance etthcse currently in pbiitics is no secret ta ycu; ta test them
again would risk plunging the ccuntryinte chaos.

The heart's freedom is knightly; its slayery is death.
It is farthee tedecide—tc be a king er a slave.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Jamaat—e-islami yields an
excellent l'E-‘IGOl'd Of
selﬂess public service.

Jamaat—e—islami is
running Pakistan‘s
largest pubiic welfare
netIiIiIerlI: prcylding
education and healthcare
facilities ta the pear and
needy.

 

09

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

Clur iaeai is is make
Pakistan an Islamic
welfare state.

Fair distribution at wealth.

Class based system is
be abalishecl

 

10

The Isiarnic state at Madina is cur ideal where a welfare system was established in
ccnsenance with the teachings of the Quran and Sunnah. The salient features at the
blessed state inclu-ti ed:

Afair distributicn cf wealth and capital was ensured. Flcw cfwealth was directed frcrn
the rich towards the pear through the system cf Zakaat and aims giying. Interest,
hoarding, crcﬁteering, and the means at ccncentraticn ct wealth were prchibited.
These measures resulted in circulation cfwealth thrcughcut the scciety and brought
prosperity ta the people.

Measures were taken to ensure that people had access to feed, clothing, healthcare,
and education. The state preyided stipends eyen to infants.

Eyerycne was abiiged tc respect the law. The distinction between the rulers and the
ruled was dissciyed. Peepie had easy access tc their calich . amaals. anti ameers.

Pecple had equal cppcrtunities in business, trade, industry. agriculture and other
professions. Means of cammunicatian were deyelaped. Regular lines at trayel were
made secure. Unrest. yielencei and pillage were stamped cut.

Money ccllected through Zakaat. charity and other means was spent an public
welfare. Within a few years. the scciety became sc prcspercus that it was hard tc find
a deserying recipient cf charity.

The state nct cnly tacit responsibility cf each individual's Iiyelihccd in his life time, it
alsc teak care at his remaining obligations after his death.

Net cnly far human beings, there were clear cbiigatians towards animals and plants
tcc. Chcpping dawn cf trees was disccurageti by the state. Caliph Umar cnce said :"If
a dag dies at thirst at the banks at the Euphrates. haw shall I answer fcrthat tcAllah.”

 

 

With a radical shift in foreign, internalr and ecencmic policies of the ccuntry, we will
striye tc attain a sovereign, independent, and dignified presence fer the ccuntry in
the ccmity cf naticns and will make it rise to the leadership at Islamic World as a
modern, deyelcped state.

We will take the fI:I||I::.Iwin§;iI steps to achieye these goals:
Dependence an IMF assistance and external ﬁnance will be phased out by

 

efficient use at internal rescurces and with the help cf expatriate Pakistanis. M a “1 f0 5t”
All international agreements will be entered into with the approval of the National J I I _P k.
Parliament. amaat—e—sami a Istan

Relaticns with ether ccuntries will be en the basis at the principles cf equality and
justice, cc-eitistence and ncn-interference.

Pakistan will play a yital rcle in uniting the Muslim Ummah. Effcrts will be made tc-
unite Muslim countries into a common parliament, defense. and market. The
Islamic institutichs wcrId-cyer, including the Drganizaticn ct Islamic Ccnfsrence
{DIE}. will be galyanized in a concrete way tcwards a shared sense cfdefendirig
the sanctity of the Hcly Quran, the Hcly Prcphet [PBUHi and other symbols cf

Islam.

Relations with China will be strengthened anti ayenues c1 bilateral cccperaticn "'1 Sustainability “1|le

all walks at life will be disccyered. achieyed threugh efﬁcient
. . . . . se i ' t I re

All disputes with India will be resclyed threugh a purposeful, comprehensive. and End ?mtir: fggtelpigi‘m

result-eriented dialogue. Net cnly the internaticnal institutions will be apprcached expatriate Pakistanis.

fcr ccnﬂict rescluticn, effcrts will be made tc win public epinicn internaticnally.

Liberaticn cf Kashmir frcrn Indian cccupaticn will be the ccrnerstcne cf cur
foreign pclicy. We held in the highest esteem the seyen—decatie—leng freedom
movement in Kashmir. It is cur firm faith that the eternai sacriﬁces made for the
Kashmircause will nctgc in yain. We believe that the cnly sciaticn tc the Kashmir
dispute lies in hctding plebiscite in the light at the UN resciutians. Ta achieve this
gcal, we ccnsitter it cur fcremcst duty to extend full cccperaticn pclitical, mcral
and diplomatic tn the oppressed Muslims cf Kashmir.

 

11

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

We will save Pakistan
from present state at
chacs created by the
terrcrisrn thrust upon it by
external farces.

All these inyclyed in
terrorism. target killings.
extortion and tend
grabbing in the country,
especially these inyclyed
in the blcbdshecl in
Karachi will brought to
justice.

 

12

 

We centiemn ali types at terrorism, be it by the state or by hamstate actbrs. We will rid

Pakistan at present state at chacs created by the terrcrisrn thrust upcn it by external
forces.

The resciuticns cf the Parliament adapted in October 2003 and May 2011 will be
implemented in letter and spirit and cirche attacks will be resisted. terrorist attacks
thwarted and military cperaticns, if any, wiil be halted.

l.i'isas granted withcut security clearance wculti be cancelled. Actiyities cf
tereigners in the ccuntry will be put under strict sunreillance.

Nc- cne inyclyed in any kind cf terrcrism will be spared.

All these inyclyeti in terrcrisrn, target kiilings, extcrticn. and land grabbing in the
ccuntry, especially these inyclyed in the bleadshed in Karachi en the 12 at May, 9
bprril, 12 cf Rabi-ui-Awwal, 11'] hi Muharrarh. and during the mcnths chuly and
August, 21111 will be espcsed and brcught to justice.

rlylissing pecple' will be traced and the groups and incliyicluals perpetuating this
atrocity will be dealt with according to the law. All legal. mcrai, pclitical and
diplomatic means will be utilized fer release at the respected daughter cf the
naticn, Dr. Aaﬁa Siddiqui. Besides eyery pcssibie assistance will be provided to
Pakistanis imprisoned in fcreign countries. The circumstances chanting the ycuth
dawn the path at defiance will be addressed.

 

 

 

 

 

Tc abolish the yestiges cfteudal system and feudalistic pciitics:

The land haldings ﬂagirs} granted by the British Raj before independence cf the
ccuntry will be ccntiscatee.

cheniment shall purchase all prcperty {cf indiyiduals] that exceed the

recommended limit at property awnership (ta be} approved by the Council at
Islamic Ideclcgy in accordance with Islamic the teachings cf Islam. The land sc
acquired shall be distributed cIn aﬁcrdable ccntiiticns to tenants and landless
farmers.

Subsistence units atwastelands {ayailable with the state] will be giyen ta landless
cultiyatcrs en the ccnditicn cf cultiyaticn after prcyiding irrigation facilities.

Income from agriculture will be taxed. cheyer. the agricultural income tail: rates
will be such that dc net hurt pccr fanhers and agricultural wcrlters.

Interest an all cutstanding agricultural leans will be waived.
Interest free leans I.Iirill be brcyided th farmers an affordable terms.

Islamic insurance {Takatul} will be setup for bratectian cf farmers” labcr and
agricultural produce.

Agricultural inputs will be made ayailable tc farmers thrcugh ZaraiTaraqiati Bank
which will be payable upcn haryest cr sate cfcrcps.
Sclar energy tube-wells will be intrcduced amcng farmers.

Taxaticn rats an agriculture inputs such as seeds, fertilizer. pesticides. etc. will be
reduced to bring dcwn their prices.

Subsidy will be provided an electricity and diesel used in agriculture tc- brihg dcwn
their prices by 511%.

An effectiye expert strategy will be implemented fer expert at farm products fer the
beneﬁt cfthe grcwer.

Projects to control water legging and salinity on war i'c-ctings will be started sc as
to increase the area cf land under cultiyaticn. The wcrk en the Left Outfall Drain
and the Right Outta" Drain will be completed an emergency basis to drain cutthe
saline water intc the sea.

Revenue recards will be ccmputerized, and eyery landowner will be issued a
corn puterized passbcck.

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

We wiil abolish the
vestiges of Mel $Em
granted by British j.

The land sci acquired shall
be distributed ch alicrclable
conditions in tenants and
landless fEII'I‘I‘l‘EI'S in
accordance ct IslarrIic
teachings.

Inccirne 1mm agriculture will
be taxed at such rates that
1ch net hurt pact fanners
arid agriculturai twitters.

Interest free loans will be
presided tc farmers en
affcn'dable terms.

 

13

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

The prices at six
essential CCl-l'l'll't'iﬂdl'liﬁﬁ -
flatlrr sugarr ghee. riceI
lentils and tea wiil be
reduced by at least
23%.

All taxes included in the
electricity anti gas biils
will be abolished in help
slash electricity and gas
prices by 30%.

We will make sweeping
changes in the taxation
system. Indirect taxaticn
wiil be tlisccuragetl.

 

14

 

High inflation has made the life at fixed-incc-me earners miserable. It is currentiy the
greatest ccncern efthe ccmmcn man. Tc bring dawn inﬁatien. Jamaat-e-lslarrii will:

Make sweeping changes in the taxation system. Indirect taxation will be
drastically reduced. The system at General Sales Tait (GET) wilt be abandcned.

The prices of six essential ccrnmcdities - fleur, sugar, ghee. rice1 lentils anti tea
will be reduced by at least 20%. Uninterrubted and adequate supply of these
ccrrimcdities wili also be ensured.

The middle man in the supply of I.regetables and fruits will be eliminated to reduce
their prices. Weekly bazaars and markets wculd be enceuraged.

All taxes included in the electricity and gas biils wili be abclished. The theft at
electricity and line lcsses will be ccntrclled and the arrears frcrn defautters will be
reccyered. These measures will help slash electricity and gas prices by 33%.

Strict measures will be taken against hoarding and brcﬁteering.

Price ccntrc-l cctincils ccmprising parliamentarians. retired cfﬁcials ct judiciary
and administration, Ulema. lawyers, journalists and ccnsumers will be set up at
different levels is determine and ccntrcl prices.

Ccnsurner Ccurts will be set up at Tehsil Ieyel and laws will be passed fcr etiectiye
impiementatich at their decision.

Tb determine the prices cf petrbleurh precincts, a cc-mmissien comprising all
stakehcilders and members at the parliament will be ccnstituted. Tc hrcyide relief
tc pecple, excessive taxation cn petroleum prcducts anti ercﬁteering will be
curbed.

Law will be enacted to make indexation ctwages mandatory.

 

 

 

Jamaat-e-lsiarni will cyerccn'ie the energy crisis by implementing immediate,
mid-term and lbng-term measures:

    

Mi

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—lslami Pakistan

Afast track strategy will be adapted to ensure 100% utilization of pcwer generation at
21111011 megawatts installed capacity within the ﬁrst six mcnths cf the geyernment.
The strater will include:

Timely payments to pbwer generation units and to ensure continuous supply tc-
them of gas and petrbleurn.

Efiectiye central en theft of electricity and line lcsses.

Reccyeries frcrh majcr defaulters.

An end tc ccrruptibn and excessive spending within pewer-subplying cernbanies.
Ccnsenraticn at power.

Buying electricity and gas frcm Iran and ICentral Asia.
Buying electricity frerh China.
Gcmpleticn cfcn-gcing pcwer-generaticn brciects en war-fccting.

Construction at 5 majcr dams with naticnal consensus.

Fewer generation by mn~cfrtheriyer hydrcelectric plants at patential lccatiens en
riyers. canals, and hill-tcrrents.

Expediting generation at pbwer through seal with assistance from China.

Power generation thrcugh wind mills in Share, KetiBunder, and at ether feasible
lccaticns.

Solar energy projects will else be initiated. Through efficient planning, cast bf
installingthese projects shall be reduced.

Nuclear and gec-therrnal energy pctential cf the ccuntry will be utilised.

Within the shcrt pen‘cd cf 11] years, the Jamaat—e-islami premises preyisicn at
511000 megawatts cf pcwer—ﬁi hshaAliah!

A fast track strategy will
be adapted 1c ensure
‘Itiﬂ‘l-ii utilizaticn ct pcwer
generatien 0120,1330
megawatts installed
capacity within the first
six months at the
gayernmeht.

Buying electricity anti gas
from Iran and Central
Asia.

 

15

 

 

Manifesto

Jemaat—e—islami Pakistan

Industry wiil be prcmbted
fer ecenemic prcgress.

Special packages will be
introduced to prcrnete
agre-based, ccttage,
small and medium-size

enterprises.

Empleyrnent

appertunities will be
created in abundance.

Land will be preyitiecl free
at cast to all these
families whe tic net cwn

any hcus

Interest tree hbuse
building leans will be

prayitied.

 

E.

16

Creating jabs is net pcssible witthut ecbnemic development.

Depending ubcn the rescarces—minerals, agriculture. iiyestcck, cottage
industry: fcrestry —ayailable in a regicn, the principle of “One industry One
Regicn“ will be tcllcwea and:

One type cf industry will be designated tr: e regien which provides
apprepriate environment and rescurces fer the industry he ﬂcurish.

Ali pcssible facilities and tail: esempticns will be preyidee.

The idea is tc industrialize the ccuntry in such a way that beagle get ebpcrtunities
in their respective regime and the main industry at the regic-n also creates
eppertunities fer allied small and medium enterprises and businesses.

Merit will be strictly cbseryed in all governmentjcbs.

Excrbitantly bald contractual jabs will be abolished.

The cambetitiye examinaticns will be heid in bath in English and in Urdu.
Dcrninance at English language in gcyernment ernbieyrnent will be abeiisheti.

Tc bring madrassa graduates intc naticnal mainstream, subjects fren‘i Islamic
curriculum will be included in ccn'ibetitiye examinations.

One million new jcbs will be created in ccllabcraticn with priyate sectcr.

Specie! packages will be intrctiuceti tc prcmcte agrc-based, ccttage and small
and mediumrsize enterprises.

Unemployed youth will be giyen unembleyment wage fer cne year.

We ackncwledge the right at eyery individual in the ccuntry tc live in a seIf-cwned
heme. Te realize this dream we shall:

lntrcduce new residential schemes in urban and rural areas. Land will be preyiaed
tree of cast tc all these families who dc nct own any house or piece at land
anywhere in the cccntry. They will eniy have to pay tieyelcprnent charges.

Intemst-free hcuse building ﬁnancing will be preyitieti.

Outstanding interest en Heuse Building Finance Cerperatibn leans shall be
wayeti.

All big factcries will be required te preyide residence tc their wcrkers

 

The Quran and Sunnah {Shariah} shall practically be made the supreme Law at

the ccuntry. All existing laws will be brcught in ccnfcrniity with the Ciaran and
Sunnah.

Justice will be brcyided tn the beeple at their decrstep through Hasba. The
religious and moral sense at the scciety will be awakened through “enjoining
greed antiterbidding eyil."

All ya cancies in judiciary will be ﬁlled within the first six months.
Judiciary will be obliged to dispose all civil and criminal cases within one year.
Filing at Fle will be simpliﬁed.

Training at pelice perscnnel in moral Iyalues will be made ccmpuisery. An effectiye
system at supervision will else be implemented.

Independent commissions will be set up at different leyels te pretect pecple from
atrccities cf pelice anti administraticn.

F ree legai assistance is all peer defendants wiil be preyitied by the state.

Salaries and facilities of pelice will be increased, their duty hours will be ﬁxed and
their Iedging facilities will be impreyee. An efﬁcient and strict system at
departmental acceuntability will be introduced.

All intelligence agencies will be answerable th courts and parliament. Stringent
laws will be enacted to end terced disappearance cf pebble in the country.

Faite pelice enceunter, extra—judicial killings, and death in custody will be
investigated threugh judicial ccmniissiens and exemplary punishment will be
meted cut to these helcl responsible.

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

All existing laws will be
brought in ccnferr'nity with
the Quran and SIJI'II'IEEI’I.

Expedition at inespensiye
E. immediate justice will
be ensured.

Abuse cf pewer by pclice
will be uprected.

 

1?

 

 

lie;

Ill.

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

Corruption will be meted
eut.

Special measu res wiil be
adapted far the receyery
Elf tl‘lﬁ WFiil'ﬁl'l Off leans.

Legislation will be
enacted in spell but stiff
penalties. including
capital punishment, fer
ﬁnancial crimes.

 

13

 

The iil-gctten wealth plundered during different period and lying in tcreign
banks will be brought back in the light at the UN Rules and Regulations
and with the ceeberaticn cf the Swiss authcrities. Special measures will
be adapted ferthe receyery cf the written eﬁ leans.

The cc-untry will be put an the read th prcgress and prcsperity by
cyerccming the current estimates biannual tax eyasicn anti ccrrupticn cf
Rs.2,5t‘iﬂ billicn.

Legisiaticn will be enacted te spell cut stiff penalties, including capital
punishmentfcrﬁnancialcrimes.

Punishments will be awarded acccrdihg tn the seyerity ct charges anti
authcrity cfthe cﬁencler.

Ali iliagctten assets will be ccnﬁscated.

Whistie blcwer's law will be enacteti. Whistle blewers will be rewarded
handsemeiy and guaranteed full pretecticn.

 

 

We will introduce an Islamic educational system which will be in harmeny with the
ideciegy at Pakistan. Uniferni educatienal system will be introduced in bath public
and priyate educational institutions throughout the ecuntry. Educational curricula
cempnsing bcth religieus and worldly subjects will be taught to students up to
intermediate ieyel in which teaching at the Quran and i-ladith will be cernpuiscry.
Madrassa students will also be taught Engiish, Mathematics, and Iether modern
subjects.

5% cf GDP will be earmarked fer educaticn.

The target at 10111113 literacy will be achieved within 5 years. UnderArticle 25(A] cf
the ccnstituticn, funds will be earmarked fer preyicling ccmpulscry and free
education ta eyery one between the ages at 5 and 15 years; the preyinces wiil be
cbligea tc use these funds tcr their designated use.

Urdu will be the medium at instruction. Prayinciai and regional languages will also
be prcmctecl.

Special emphasis will be given th technical and yccaticnal educaticn.

Fer professional education, educational expenses of deserving students from
beer families wiil beeefrayed by the gcyernrnent.

Private educatien secter will be enceuraged. cheyer, educaticnal standards
ancl reascnabie fee structure will be ensured thrcugh legislation.

Eyery teacher will own a house tc live in at the end at hisi’her career.
Students Unicns will be reyiyed.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

53-11 of GDP will be
earmarked fer ebucaticn.

Unifcnh educational
system will be introduced
in bath pubiic anti priyate
educaticnal instituticns.

The 130% literacy will be
achieyee within 5 years.

Special emphasis will be
giyen tc technicai and
yecaﬁenaledacaﬁen.

 

19

 

 

 

alibi

i .
abet

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

SeIf-empleyment
ECHEWEE Will DE
introduced and young
peepie will be presided
interest 1133 10-3113 On 3011
terms.

We will give priority to
sciying the brcblerns at
youth.

Educaticn sperts and
entertainment
appertunities will be
created fer the youth.

 

20

 

Our greatest naticnal asset is cur youth. Heweyer, they are in
distress. We can neither achieye peace ncr prcgress witheut
addressing the issues at the youth. We will giye priority to
solving the problems at youth.

Educaticn will be made accessible to the ycuth.
Emphasis en Iirccatibnai and technical educatien wilt help
them ta earn liyelihccd.

Merit will be ebsenrect strictly in recruitments in public
sector.

Self—empleyment schemes will be introduced and yeung
pebble will be preyitied interest free leans en scft tarnis.

Sperts and entertainment eppertunities will be created fer
the ycuth.

Separate grounds and stadiums will be censtructed fer
yeungwcmen.

Pcsitiye cultural activities will be prcmctecl. Regicnal
cultures will be encouraged.

 

 

 

Health is the basic right at eyery human being.

2% cf the budget esti mate will be earmarked far health sector.
The healthcare budget will be increased.

Emergency' facilities wili be brcyideti free at cast in all hospitals.

Special brcyisicns will be matte in the budget fer preyiding heaitcare facilities tc
mcthers and infants.

Maternity hcrnes wili be established thrcughcut the ccuntryi especially in yiliages.
3e nrices cf specialists will be preyitiecl at ail Tehsil and District Hcsbitals.

Free healthcare will be preyided to the patients suffering from cardiac, renal? and
liyer failures. Free senrices will else be preyideci tc patients suffering frcrn cancer,
AIDS, TB. anti drug abuse.

Out Patient Department (OFD) facilities will be brcyideti at bubiic hospitals in the
eyening as weil.

Islamic Insurance schemes [takafuli will be initiated te preyide healthcare
facilitiestcall citizens.

All imparted drugs will be exempted frcn'i all duties, while quality dmgs will be
matteinsicle Pakistan.

Hcmecpathy anti Tib-e-Unani [Greek Medicine} will be promoted.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Health is the
respbnsibility cf the
geyernment

Health facilities will be
preyideti to all citizens.
regardless of their sect.
reiigicn 3i ethnicity.

 

21

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jernaat—e—islami Pakistan

Tl'iE inheritance Ell'iﬁ
eIiIrnership rights ef
wernen will be enferced.

It is the belicy efJamaat-
e—lslarni that wernen
enjey secial, Iegai anti
pelitical rights besteweti
upen them by 3hariah.

Wemen will be preyieee
secure and respectful
environment te study and
Wlﬂl‘li.

Discriminatieri ef wemen
in the scciety will be
eliminated threugh
changes in secietal

behayiers anti legislatien.

 

22

Islam helds wernen in great hener. Wernen censtitute mere than half ef Pakistan's
bepulatien. It is the pelicy ef Jamaat-e-lslanii that wernen enjey seciai. legal, and
beliticai rights bestewed upen there by Shriah se that they centribute meaningfully te
the wetfare ef the eeuntry. Te heip wernen realize their fuil petentiai and centribute te
their families and the seciety:

The inheritance and ewnershib rights efwemen will be enferceii

Un-lslaniic practices e1 heayy eewry, marriage with I:Ziuran, wanni, Kare-kari,
hener killing. etc. will be curbed.

Wernen will be preyiriecl secure and respectful enyirenment te study frem primary
te higher educatien standards. We suppert separate celleges anti uniyersities fer
wenien.

The practice ef TripleTaiaq {Three F'reneuneernents ef Diyeree in ene Sitting} will
be brehibited threugh Iegislatien.

Discriminatien against wemen in the scciety will be eliminated threugh changes
in secietal behayiers and legislatien.

Werking weh'ien will be preyieecl secure and prefessienal werking enyirenment.

In the cases e1 wieews er eiyercees. the restrictien in age-lin‘iit fer geyernrnent
anti semi-geyernnientjebs will tie reiaitecl.

Feur rnenth maternity leave will be granted te wernen with full pay and they will be
ailewecl leaye en half—eay fer upbringing ef the child. They will be guaranteed ieb
security during their leaye. Their duty statien wili net be changed. During their
ieaye. they will centinue te accrue senierity and remain eligible fer pay increases
anti benefits.

Female students will be granted admissien elese te their residences.
Cettage ind ustry will be premeted te enable we men te werit at be me.
Wernen will be preferred fer teaching at primary leyel.

 

 

 

All external debt will be paid eﬁ within the shertest pessible time. He new debt will
be incurred anti the belicy ef seif—sufﬁciency will be adeptee. External debt
iiabilities incurred during autecratic regimes will be settled in accereance with
internatienal laws and regulatiens.

Nen—cleyeleprneht expenditure will be reduced by at least 311%. This will tie
achieyee by cutting eewn expenditure en leeging anti traveling ef geyernment
functienaries. prehibiting purchase and maintenance ef expensive cars and
restricting expenditure en layish geyernment funetiens.

Taxatien system will be simplified. system ef ﬁxed tax will be intreducee fer small
sheekeeeers. Ne new taxes will be levied. General Sales Tax {1331'} will be
abelished. Tait—net will be breadened by reducing taxatien rates.

Special brejects fer investment by eyerseas Pakistanis will be prepared te help
them start business within a shert span ef slit menths. In priyatizatien, preference
will giye te the Pakistani inyesters.

Eyils like interest, heareings, preﬁteering lettery. gambling, bribery, smuggling,
and layish spending will be upreetecl.

Interest-free banking system will be eneeuraged. Madhaarba anti rnusharaita
partnership willbeyigereusly eremeted.

The system at eellectien ef Zahaat and Llsher will be retern'iee. Current practices

ef distributien e1 Zakat en belitical anti regienal bases will be tiisceuragee anti
discentinued.

Slum dwellers will be awarded ewnership rights.
Salaries and bensiens will be indexed te inﬁetien.

Fellewing the example ef early periee ef Islam, secial security system will be
devised te distribute adequate ailewances te children. elcl beeple, widews,
erphans, unempleyecl, and disabled. Special hemes will be buiit fer the destitute.

Seft terrn interest free leans will be given te lewrineeme sectiens ef the scciety fer
educatien e1 their children. censtructien e1 heLises and purchase ef
transbertatien.

Lane grabbing will be ubreeted anti IgieIlIernrnent efﬁcials abetting these practices
will be identiﬁed and dealt with seyerely.

All revenue will be eellecteri threugh banks instead ef Patwaris.

 

 

 
 

ﬁf-

weer”
Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

  

All external debt will be
paid eff within shertest
pessible time.

Nen-eeyelebmental
expenditure wiil be
reduced by at least 31.1%.

Expenditure en layish
geyernrnent functiens will
be ¢th dﬂWi‘i.

Ne new tease will be
levied. Tait-net wiii be

broadened by reducing
taxatien rates.

 

23

 

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islarni Pakistan

Werkers wiil be preyided
healthcare anti heusing
facilities; their children
will receive free
educatien.

Wages will be indented te
intiatien and reyiseti
annually.

Alter retirement.
pensiens will be given te
the laberers.

 

24

Jamaate—lslarni will ceneentrate en industrial grewth and implement a new iaber
eelicy in which:

Laberers will be giyen reasenable share in cerperate preﬁts.

Fair wages and salaries will be fixed fer werkers. Wages witl be indexed te
inﬂatien anti reyisecl annually.

Preﬁtable industries and erganizatiens ef strategic impedance wili net be
priyatized. Preyieusly privatized public secter industry at iew prices andier seft
terms and cenciitiens will be reyisited. Privatizatien will net be aliewee te create
menepelies anti espleitatien.

In priyatizatien ef pubiic secter erganizatiens, rights e1 emeleyees will be
pretected.

The preceeds frern bnyatizatien will be diverted tewards debt retirement and en
educatien, healthcare, and public welfare pregrarns.

Trade Uniens will be allewed te impreye empleyer—empleyees relatiens.

Tracie Unien leadership will be inyelyed in privatizatien decisiens, budget melting.
and ether related issues.

Fer better utilizatien e1 werltferee and te increase their earning capacity. pregrarns
fer ereyieing en-jeb trainings te werlters will be started.

Thewerlting eflabereeurtswill be imereyeti.

Werkers will be preyided healthcare and heusing facilities; their children will
receive free educatien.

After retirement, pensiens will be given te the laberers.
Centractual empleyment wili be abelishee in pubiic and priyate secters.

Fer disabled and inyalid, sufﬁcient quetas in empleyments at all leyels will be
earmarked.

Menthly maintenance allewance will be preyieecl te fully disabled persens.
Special pregrams will be started fer imparting erefessienal training te werlters.

Werkers Welfare Funds will be used exclusiyeiy fer the welfare ef werkers and
their misuse wili be discentintied.

 

The pensiens ef retired pubiic anti priyate secter erneleyees will
be reasenably increased. In case ef death ef a pensiener. his
wieewshall be entitled te receiye full pensien.

Law will be enacted fer indexing pensien te inflatien fer
determining annual increase in pensien.

Citizens ever 61] years ef age will be given exemptien in preperty
tax fer the preperty they reside in.

Citizens eyer SCI years ef age will be giyen exemptien in yehicle
tax fer ene carer meter-cycie in their persenal use.

Senier citizens will be allewed 50% tiisceunt in air-fares, railway,
public tra ns pert. anti fer stay at guest heuees.

Separate ceunters will be set up at all public places fer the
eemfert ef senier citizens and the disabled.

Iy'lenthly allewance will be given te impeyerisheci eld citizens. A
respectable system will be deyisee fertheir permanent care.

 

 

.w
Manifesw

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Law will be enacted fer
indexing beneien te
inﬂatien fer determining
ahn ual increase in
DBT‘ISlOi‘I.

Citizens ever 33 years ef
age will be given
exemptien in preperty tax
fer the preperty they
reside In.

Senier citizens wiil be
ailewecl 50% diseeunt in
air-tares. railway. public
transpert. anti fer stay at
Iguest heuses.

 

25

 

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

lIZu‘eIlrernment will help
NGDs in their eﬁerts te
feed tarnished, preyitie
shelter te hemeless end
in ereyitiing healthcare
and education te the

peer.

 

26

Jamaatelsiarni has a breed histery ef seryice te humanity eyer since
Pakistan carne inte being. In wake ef the disastreus eath-euake et 31'
Deteber, 213115 and the ﬁeeds ef 231D, Jamaatae—Islami werkers set
great examples at ﬁnancial and persenal sacriﬁces. Theusantis ef
Jamaat weriters relentlessly preyideri services and spent milliehs ef
mpees in rescue and relief eperatiens. In this spirit:

A platferrn will be preyieed te all the NGDs ef the ceLIntry te enable
them te eeyise a mutual sappert mechanism.

Geyernnient will help NGUs in their eﬁerts te feed tarnished, preys
shelter te hemeless. and in their eﬁerts in preyiding healthcare and
educatien te the peer.

Training in disaster management will be preyided te yelunteers.

A part ef Zakaat. Ushr. and charity cellected by the geyernrnent will
be spent threugh NGGs. The afﬂuent and yirtueus peeple will be
enceuragee te participate in welfare actiyities.

 

 

 

Adequate reseurees will be ailecated te educate masses in the tents ef Islam.

Necessary measures will be taiten te estabiish the system ef Salat, Zakaat, and
Lishr. “Sanetity ef the Menth ef Ramazan Ordinance" will be strictly enfereed.
Electricity, water supply and gas will be breyideti free ef cest te mesques.

Ulema anti Khuttaab will be trained te play a rele in betterment ef the seciety. The
mesques will be given their due status.

An erganizatien will be established te create and strengthen sectarian harmeny.
Hate rnengering against any sect er religien will net be ailewed.

Breadcasting ef immerai pregran'is and ads will be banned and the media will be
made te abide by a merel cede ef cenduct.

Simple liying will be premeted in the seeiety.

The geyernment efﬁcialsietﬁeers will be ebliged te adept simple iiying.
Expenditure en large heuses. expensive cars and estrayagance will be
disceuragee.

Layish spending en marriages will be banned. The iaw en dewry restrictien will be
enfereetzi eﬁectiyeiy. Marriage leans will be granted te the needy.

Beggary will be eliminated. Beggars will be preyidecl yecatienal trainings and
"F’retectien Hemes" te liye in.

Te diseeurage urban sprawl and cengestien in large cities, new cities will be
deyelebee en medern lines.

Censtructien ef unnecessariiy large. expensive heuses will be eisceuraeee.

The system fer alletment ef land wiil be simpliﬁed. Alletment ef land as bribery, fer
belitical affiliatien and en hepetisrn will be stepped. 'Bait-uI-Maal' will help the
needy fe rid te fer the mselyes.

System et cleanliness will be impiemented threugheut the ceuntry; cities and
yillages alike. Culture e1 cleanliness will be prernetee. Littering will be dealt with as
a crime.

Eﬁectiye measures will be taken te centrel enyirenrnental belletien.

Brethels will be wiped eut. lmmeral practices being en in the se-callee guest
heu ses will be step bed.

A culture ef medesty will be intredeced. Expleitatien ef wemen fer cen'imercial
purpese will be stepped.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Necessary measures will
be taken te establish the

system e13alat.2aitaat
and Ushr.

Simple living will be
cremated in the scciety.

Layish spending en
marriages will be banned.

Hate mengering against
any sect er religien will
net to be aliewecl.

 

2?

 

 

 

alibi

i .
shes

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islami Pakistan

Military will be ac equiped
that Pakistan's defences
beceme invincible.

Nuclear technelegy will
be fuily eretectee anti
further eeyeleped.

 

23

Jamaat—ealslami will equip Pakistan's army, airaferce, and hairy
with latest technelegy fer pretectien and defense ef the ceuntry.

Army Act and ether laws wili be amended te preyent army efﬁeers
frerh interfering in extra-prefessienal matters. especially belitics.
Fercible taiteeyer e1 geyernment will be made punishable. Laws
wiil else be amended te transferm the eyerall culture ef the armed
ferees and bring it in censenance with their n'iette ef Faith. Jihad.
and Taqwa and te curb all activities which run eentrary te the
mette.

Nuclear technelegy will be fully pretectee anti further eeyeleeeci.
it will net be relied—back under any external pressure.

The spirit ef Jihad will be revised in the naticn. Ail abie-bediecl
men and wernen between the ages ef 15 and 35 will be giyen
een'ipulsery military training.

He ene will be allewee te use Pakistan's lane1 nayal er aerial limits
fer its military geais.

Like military efficers, Jawans shall else be breyidee heuses at the
end eftheir services.

 

 

 

Jamaatsehislami believes in the treettern et the press. We will pretest and

advance an independent media free frem undue geyeninient interference er
pressure.

Unless it relates te naticnal security, jeurnalists wili net be terced te reyeal the
seurces at their intermatien.

Health seryices will be ereyided free te all jeurnalists. their parents and their
families at geyernment hespitals.

The chiidren efjeurnalists will be preyided free educatien anti schelarships fer
highereducatien.

Where needed. due bretectien wili be breyieee tejeurnalists upen their request.

“Seeial Security Fund" will be created te assist the families ef deceased
jeurnalists.

The family ef any jeurnalist whe dies in the line et duty will be cembensateti by a
grant at at least Rs. 2 millien. Rs. 1 millien and Rs. 0.5 respectively will be given
fer severe and miner injuries incurred in the line ef duty.

Necessary facilities will be extended te jeurnalists ensuring their freedem ef
expressien as custeeian ef public interest under article 191a) et the eenstitutien.

AII geyernn‘ient institutiens {federal and preyincial] will make sure that they
ceeperate with jeurnalists in preyieing them access te intermatien in terms ef the
articie 15 efthe eenstitutien.

Acede etcenduct ferthe mediawill be framed in the light efthe teachings ef Islam,
Pakistan's censtitutien, anti Isian‘iic traditien. Leading jeurnalists will be entmstee
cernpliance cf the eerie ef cenduct.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Balanced media pelicy
Will be 1211511311.

We seek independent
media free frern undue
geyernrnent Interference.

Heaith services will be
breyieee free at best te
all jeurnalists.

The children efjeurnalists
will be preyieed tree
Educﬂtlﬂt’t.

 

29

 

 

 

Manifest

Jamaat—e—islarni Pakistan

IT infrastructure will be
eeyeleeee en niceern
standards.

Pelicy fer useful and
secure usage ef Internet
will be devised.

 

30

 

Interrnatien Teehnelegy has assumed a central rele in human and ecehemic iife. It is
playing an impertant rele in ecenerhic deyelepnient the wertd eyer. Heweyer. it has
net achieyed the status et an industry in eur ceuntry anti despite the fact that the ﬁeid
was wide epen befere us, eur market share in giebal IT industry is iimited.

In meeting the chatlenges ef the 21‘” century, Jamaat—estslami will matte IT the grewth
engine ef ecenerny cf the ceuntry and will aim at making Pakistan the hub ef
intermatien technelegy in the regien. Interrnatien technelegy infrastructure will be
breught te internatienal standards. IT will be used te meeernize educatien. health.
teurism. agriculture. and natienal security. A cerruptien-free. educated. and
censeientieus scciety will be built by using intermatien teehnelegy. The fellewing will
help achieye these ebjectiyes:

IT infrastructure will be deyeleped en metiern standards.
IT secterwill be recegnized as an industry and steps will be taken fer it te ﬁeurish.
E—geyernance and e—management will be implemented.

Institutiens will be established fer educatieh and deyeleping expertise in e—
geyemrnent.

ITwill be used ter deliyering urban ser'irices.
High quality human reseurcedeyelepment in IT will be stressed.
Public secter erganizatiens will be 'ciigitized'.

Pelicy fer useful and secure usage ef the Internet will be eeyisee and
implemented.

 

 

 

Minerities are an indispensable part et eur seciety. We will ensure and pretest
censtitutienai ene iegal rights et ali minerities.

In persenai matters, reiigieus laws and traditiens ef minerities wili take
precedence.

Minerities will enjey rig hts te educatien, embleyment and ether ciyii liberties.
Places ef wership ef all minerities will be pretedee and respected.
Any diserirninatieri. injustice er bias tewartts minerities will be diseeuragee.

Etiectiye and simple brececlure wili be cleyised fer minerities te elect their
representatiyes in naticnal anti preyinciai legislatures.

The institutien et Iecal bedies plays an impertarit rele in deyelebment and pregress et
any ceuntry. Unfertunately. this institutien has always been espleitee by military
eictaters fer their persenal gains. On the ether hand. peiitical ferces haye always
been ebliyieus e1 their impertance. In car yiew, the system ef iecal bedies has been
unsuccessful in the ceuntry because ether than an ambigueus paragraph. the
censtitutien ef Pakistan eees net preyide a deﬁnitiye framewerk fer this institutien.
Keeping in yiew eur past experiences anti the requirements ef all the federating
units. we will make necessary amendments in the law te make this system werl-t. The
law will deﬁne the preeedure fer electing Iecal leadership, as well as the pewer and
resbensibilities cf the elected indiyieuals. In this regard. all pelitical ferces will be
taken en beard. We will strive te intrecluce the system et Iecal bedies as the third layer
efgeyemment, aleng with the federal anti the preyinciai geyernments.

A detailed readmap ter eiectiens. pewers, and jurisdictiens ef Iecal geyernments
wiil be presided.

Fer reguiarly heieing ef eiectiens fer Iecal geyernments and te ernpewer them te
deliyer seryices efﬁciently arrangements will be made.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Cernplete security will be
accorded te all minerities.

Menenities will enjey
rights te educatien,
empieyrnent. and other
civil iiberties.

A detailed readmep fer
eiectiens. beware. end
jurisdictiens ef Iecal
geyernments will be
provided.

 

31

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jemaat—e—islarni Pakistan

Educatienal
infrastructure, healthcare
facilities and means at
cemrnenicatien in the
area will be imereyed.

Te eempensate ter the
injustices. legal eeenemic
and educatienai reterrns
wiil be introduced.

 

32

 

The special status et tribal areas shall be respected.

We will assure encl ef military eperatiens and withdrawal et armed ferces frern the
regien. Peace will eeme threugh negetiatien. The internally displaced peeele will
be breught back heme. Lessee et three and breberties in the eberatiens will be
eempensateti.

Steps will be taken te impreye educatienai infrastructure, healthcare facilities.
anti means ef cemmunicatien in the area.

The tribes have been depriyed ef legal and censtitutienai rights fer 55 years. Te
eempensate ter the injustices ef the past, legal, ecenernic anti educatienal
referrns will be intreeucee.

The jurisdictien cf the parliament and the ceurt's will be extended te the FATA
regien threugh an amendment in article 24? e1 the eenstitutien.

The eewers te frame and amend laws wili treat with the parliament and the elected
assembly ef the tribes, net with the President. FCR will be abelishee. The
reseensibility te enact an alternatiye te FCR will lie with the eiected assembiy ef
the tribes.

The elected assembly will have the autherity te determine the status ef the tribes.
the terms cf the institutiens. their rele. their rights and respensibilities.

 

 

Te ensure right te life, right te empleyment and basic necessities at life ter 15
rnillien reelttents ef the preyince. such tieyeieen‘ient prejects will be irnptenientee
that wiil eleyate the ecenemic status ef the preyince te the level ef the rest ef the
ceuntry. Fer this. Quetta and ether cities ef the preyince will be deyeleped inte
medel cities.

In accerdanee with the 1513 censtitutien and the 15“ amendment. preyincial
rights and pewers will be granted te Elaiuchistan within ene year. Majer part of the
natural rescurces emanating trem the preyinee will be spent within the preyince.

Gas reyalty will be revised and within 3 years, all dues will be paid.

Ajeint jirga will be set up in cellaberatien with the parliament. preyinciai assembly
and the geyernrnent te recempense fer the injustices ef the past six decades
dene te the breyihce by different autherities.

5% queta in empleyrnent will be ensured fer the beeple ef Baluchistan under the
censtitutien.

Prempt measures will be taiten te reeeyer all missing bersens.

Sandak, Recetiec. Gwadar, Charnalang and ether prejects will he accernplished
threugh indigeneus expertise and administratiye skill.

Electricity will be purchased trem Iran te electrify ceastal and berder areas.
IShaghi. Dilla Abdullah and Makran will be preyidee electricity generated threugh
selar and wind energy.

Agriculture. Iiyesteclt anti ferestry will be deyeleped te tackle incessant draught
like situatien in the preyince.

The berder trade will be reviewed in yiew et Iecai requirements.

 

 
    

a...

weer”
Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

DeyeIepment projects will
be implemented te
eieyate the ecenernic
status ef the breyinee.

Itluetta and ether cities cf
the preyince will be
deyelebee Inte meeel
cities.

Majer part ef the natural
reseIu rces emanatin

trem the preyince wi I be
spent within the preyince.

5% eueta in empleyment
will be ensured fer the
beeble et Baluchistan
under the censtitutien.

 

33

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—islarni Pakistan

Supremacy e1 the lilluran
and Sunnah will be
parameunt.

Recemmendatiens ef
Geuncil of Islamic
ldeel y will be given
specie status

lntra Party electiens will
be made mandatery.

Jamaat—eIlslamiwill. Inshaallah ,bring the tellewing censtitutienai reten'ns:

Article 2 ef the censtitutien will be amended te ensure supremacy et the Quran
and Sunnah.

Appeintment et heads et all censtitutienai erganizatiens. agencies and regulatery
autherities [fer example. Auditer General. Chairman Public Service Cernrnissien.
Dmbucisbersen, Chain'nan NAB, Beyerner State Bank. FIA. IE. NEPRA, PTA.
F'EIyIFtA, EPA, DGRA. PPRA. COP. SEEP} will be made aﬁer apereyal and
clearance ef relevant standing cen'irnittees ef the parliament.

Article 5 will be amended te grant eyery citizen the right te seek legal remedy
against abregatien. repeal er suspensien ef the censtitutien and te legally deal

with these indiyiduals er erganizatiens that are feuntt effeneing the law er abetting
the etfenders.

The censtitutien anti the releyant laws will be amended te ensure electiens within
the belitical parties.

Article 1? will be amended te ban the parties weriting against the censtitutien ef
Pakistan and its Islamic identity and character.

Article 45 will be amended te bring the President‘s right ef clemency in
censenance with the Quran anti Sunnah.

Cemprehensiye legislatien will be intreeucee ter effectiye implementatien ef
Articles 52, 53, and 113 ef the censtitutien.

Articles 1'3. 55. 51, 55 anti 121 cf the censtitutien will be amended te require
appreyal ef Finance Bill {Budget} by beth the heuses ef the parliament and fer
cernpulsery debate en the budget at all institutiens including the military
establishment.

Taxes will be levied eniy with the appreyal ef the cencerned assembly. This
requires an end te the system ef supplementary grants. Article '1'? will be
amended aceerdingly.

An amendment will be made in the censtitutien te ensure that all
recemmendatiens et Ceuncil ef Islarnic ldeeiegy are enacted inte law within a
giyen peried ef tirne, failing which the recemmentlatiens shall autematieally
becerne law efthe lane.

The present system at excluding tn‘bal areas trem the law at the land will be
abelished and these areas. Articles 245 anti 24Tib} will be amended. These
changes willbe breughtabeutunderthe tellewing guiding principles:

The censent ef residents ef the Federally Administrated Tribal Areas
aejeining Khyber Pakhtunkhawe preyince will be seught threugh a

 

referendum heist under Article 245(e} ef the censtitutien anti te either
these areas will be eyeiyee inte a separate preyince er merged them
inte Kh yber Fakhtunkhawa preyince.

The areas eti't'hyber Pakhtunithawa preyince speciﬁed in Articles 245 {a}
{I} (ii) (iii) 1in and 245(5) will be merged inte the Khyber Pakhtunkhawa
preyince.

All eracenian laws. including FER fer tn'bai areas. shall be repealed. The
censtitutien and the laws ef the land will be enfercett in the tribal areas. The
fundamental rights granted in the censtitutien will be guaranteed te all citizens.

All censtitutienai requirements will be fulﬁlled te adept Urdu as the naticnal
language. Necessary legal anti administrative steps will else be taken te premete
preyincial and regienal languages like Punjabi, Sindhi, Baluchi, Pushtu, Brahayi
anti Siraiki.

The censtitutien will be amended te create new preyinces en administrative
greunds with natienal censensus.

A censtitutienai package will be anneuncetl te remedy the injustices eerie Ie the
peeple et Baluchistan.

Sincere and persistent efferts will be made fer the establishment et an impartial
and henest interim geyernntent te ensure helcling et transparent, impartial and
independent eiectiens. The estabiishntent ef an independent and impartial
Electien Cemmissien, reterrns in the electeral system fer enfercement et
cenditiens iaie dewn in articles 52 and 53, and fer gradual intreductien ef the
system et precertiehate representatien.

Necessary facilities will be breyitled te wernen fer barticipatien in eiectiens.

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaal—e—lslami Pakistan

Ali censtitutienai
requirements will be
fulﬁlled 1e adept Urdu as
the natienei language.

Remedial ectiens will be
taken te ensure helding
et transparent. impartial
and independent
eiectiens.

 

35

 

 

 

 

 

Manifesto

Jamaat—e—Islami Palestan

36

 

,"ﬂt‘lt

 

Fer a blight tutu re fer Pakistan
Fer building an Islamicweitare state

demeeratic Pakistan

Eyeryene has access te educatien and health care,

aneaheuse teliye in

Justice is dispensed te peeple at their deerstep

Te put eur beleyed ceuntry

en the read to pregress and bresperity
Fer resteratien ef peace. harmeny and unity.

Issue :

   

11:. .

«3.:

{-

mbssﬂ

u. I

- E Illllll it? "I |i|.Ii'. .

'i.-:“"_ ’-

er'ea-l' '_—" .-.

. .J'
.-
Ir_- .
I_'—|-

 

 

 

Jamaat-e-lslami Pakistan

Maneeerah Multan Read, Lahere
Ph: 042—3541552324. 35432351.
Fax: 042354321 54
E-mait: infebijarnaaterg, Url: www.iarnaaterg

JIP easier if. it eIJIPerriciai

     

iiiiiiii

