

 Are we going to allow ourselves to be overwhelmed by the immensity of the task that is confronting us and let our new-born State fonder under the cruel and dastardly blows struck by our enemies? This is challenge to our very existence and if we are to survive as a nation and are to translate our dreams about Pakistan into reality, we shall have to grapple with the problems facing us with redoubled zeal and energy.(Address to Civil, Naval, Military and Air Force Officers of Pakistan, Karachi on October 11, 1947)Quaid Azam Muhammad Ali JinnahAllama Muhammad Iqbal
3


2
A Personal MessageFromPresident PML(N)As the nation prepares to go to the polls, it is of utmost importance that we understand the enormity of the multiple challenges confronting the nation. It is also of great significance that the nation recognizes the instrumental role of Muslim League for overcoming them. It is the same League that established Pakistan under the leadership of the Quaid-e-Azam in accordance with the vision of Allama Iqbal. It is the same League which built the infrastructural and policy framework for economic development in 1990s. The same League that made Pakistan an invincible nuclear power.
3
We are all aware of the enormous damage done to the country in the past decade at the hands of authoritarian rulers and their inept and corrupt successors after 1999. Poor governance, deteriorating law and order situation, repeated breaches of sovereignty, widespread corruption, galloping inflation, unprecedented load shedding, massive unemployment and increasing poverty have left the citizens in a vicious cycle of pain and suffering.The challenge ahead of us is not only to re-establish the supremacy of law and ensure respect for democratic institutions, but to create a society that is based on social justice and ensures the well-being of all Pakistanis without any discrimination.My party’s manifesto for the coming elections presents a comprehensive, all-embracing agenda for national renewal and real change. Our’s is not an agenda only meant to merely overcome the current crises. We are here to revive the confidence of people by instilling hope and restoring national dignity and laying foundation for a sustainable growth and development.The manifesto sets out a realistic and sound framework for pulling back the nation from the edge of abyss. This is to be achieved by means of socio-economic development, generating opportunities and jobs, based on equity, fairness and justice, on the foundation of democratic principles and above all, of the rule of law.Pakistan Muslim League (N) is the only political party which has the vision, proven track record, and an experienced and competent team to fulfill the dreams of Pakistan’s founding father. We will do this by building consensus on major national issues and by bringing abouta real change in institutions, political culture and socio-economic conditions of Pakistan. We are also committed to convert Pakistan’s diverse cultural and ethnic heritage into its strength by promoting inclusiveness and greater inter-provincial harmony.
4
During both its tenures in power, the PML(N) fully demonstrated its ability to make economy the centre piece of its priorities. Essentially, because in the age of geo economics only nations with strong and vibrant economies prosper. PML(N) brought about revolutionary changes in the national economy, although both its tenures were interrupted. In the short period of 2½ years from November 1990 to April 1993, the Party initiated basic reforms. These reforms transformed the nature of Pakistan’s economy from a closed and over-regulated system to a more open and de-regulated framework. It brought about a fundamental change in the environment for investment and business. We also achieved notable success in resolving inter-provincial issues. We achieved this milestone by concluding, through consensus, two historic accords i.e. the Water Accord of March 1991, and the fourth NFC Award of April 1991. A summary of main achievements of PML(N) in both of its tenures is given in the Annexures for the keen readers.I invite you all to join us in our mission to resurrect Pakistan as a progressive and prosperous nation. In 21st century, let’s spearhead as a moderate and modern welfare state with Islamic values where everyone can live with equal opportunities, security & dignity regardless of religion, ethnicity, or language. Creating headways in conformity with the hopes and aspirations of our people, let’s foster peace in our lives, in our region and in the comity of nations. It is in this spirit and in the spirit of our founding fathers, that I entrust you with this momentous manifesto.Yours,(Moha	Nawaz	f)President PML(N)January 5, 2013
5
6
EconomicRevival
7
Economic RevivalPakistan today faces enormous economic challenges. PML(N) is fully aware of the fast declining trends in all macro-economic indicators. This has been the result of inept federal government policies over the last five years.The country is currently trapped in a trajectory of low growth combined with high inflation due to incompetence, poor governance and high levels of corruption. In terms of GDP growth, this has been the worst five years period in the entire history of Pakistan with a dismal annual average growth of 2.9%. In terms of inflation, only once in Pakistan’s history, we have witnessed a worse double digit inflationary spell than the present tenure and that was in PPP’s first government from 1972 to 1977. This lethal combination of low growth and high inflation has led to a massive increase in poverty and unemployment.As in the 1990’s, PML(N)’s top priority will be the revival of the economy to double the GDP growth rate from less than 3% in the past five years to over 6% during the next five years. Economic revival in fact holds the key for achieving other vital economic and social targets listed in this manifesto.Sustainable and inclusive economic growth requires: Optimum utilization of the country’s physical and human resources; Full exploitation of the technological potential in industry and agriculture. Sound macro-economic policies to reduce deficits in the budget and the balance of payments, curb inflationary pressures and reduce country’s dependence on foreign loans and assistance. Democratic governance which requires supremacy of the constitution and the rule of law in order to reduce corruption, tax evasion, wasteful expenditure, misuse of power, and meets the aspirations of the people.
8
One of the most important pre-requisite for higher GDP growth will be to raise the investment – GDP ratio from 12% at present to at least 20% in the next 5 years. This has been a benchmark which was achieved during the first tenure of PML(N) in the early 1990’s. A balance will be struck between fiscal consolidation and growth. Despite the unfavorable security and law and order situation, the investment climate can significantly improve with improved governance.In the absence of single strong driver of growth at present, Pakistan has to create several mutually reinforcing engines of growth to meet the emerging economic challenges in this age of globalization. PML(N) will give special priority to the following sectors: Higher investment in the energy sector as outlined in chapter 2 of this manifesto. Attracting foreign investment in the agriculture and livestock sectors to facilitate exports of high value products to regional markets. Converting at least 50% of the remittances by Overseas Pakistanis into investments. These remittances currently stand at US$ 13 billion a year. We intend to take this progressive initiative by offering special financial products to Pakistani diaspora. This economic revival driver will also feature identifying growth prospects in the IT and other employment-oriented schemes will be encouraged. Large-scale infrastructure projects are catalysts for boosting the economy. PML(N) will focus on motorways, dams, housing projects and development of new urban centers and cities. Pakistan holds sizeable reservoirs of oil, gas and other minerals. PML(N) will pursue mineral exploration and abstraction with renewed vigor while ensuring absolute protection of the interests of the nation. Foreign investment would be encouraged and facilitated in this sector. Development of this sector will be a game changer for Pakistan’s economy. A vibrant domestic commerce is a pre-requisite for innovation entrepreneurship, quality assurance and product development. It stimulates growth in the private sector and positions countries to
9
effectively expand into international markets. Domestic commerce will be encouraged by focusing on areas like competitiveness, protection, market regulation, wholesale markets, retail markets, storage and warehousing, transportation and real estate.As a part of our economic revival plan, PML(N) is setting the following targets to be achieved during its tenure:1. Budget Deficit will be brought down to 4%. This will be achieved through:a. Increase in revenues. Tax to GDP ratio to increase from 9% at present to 15% by the end of 2018.b. One-third reduction in current expenditures other than salaries, allowances and pensions.c. Losses from State Enterprises amounting to approx. Rs. 400 billion will be reduced through revamping / privatizing these institutions.2. Inflation will be brought down to single digit in the range of 7 or 8% by:a. Limiting government borrowing.b. Decreasing tax rates.c. Reducing energy shortage and cost of producing energy.d. Lower interest rates through effective monetary policy.e. Removing supply side bottlenecks through increased agricultural output and reduced wastages.3. Industrial manufacturing will be taken up to 7 or 8%.4. Investment GDP ratio will rise to 20%.Other initiatives for economic revival would include:a. Open up markets and encourage regional trade. This will open up avenues for investment, growth and jobs.b. Large investment in human capital with improved service delivery in health and education.c. Further reforms in financial sector and capital markets.d. Improved regulatory environment on national level.e. Focus on youth and women.
10
f. Reducing bureaucratic procedures to speed up decision making.PML(N) fully understands the gravity of the present global and national economic crises and the enormity of the tasks outlined above, but with clearly defined goals and objectives, strong leadership and highly professional team, PML(N) is determined to bring about fundamental and far reaching reforms and changes in the economic landscape of the country. By completing its unfinished agenda of turning Pakistan into Asia’s leading economy with high competitiveness, PML(N) will shape a better Pakistan. This is being aimed at, to make Pakistan emerge as one of the top ten economies of the world in the 21st century. A national economic agenda 2025 shall be developed with consensus for continuity in economic policies.Industry and Trade:Manufacturing is the third important sector of the economy accounting for about 18% of GDP and 13% of total employment. For the economy to grow and provide more jobs, the growth of the manufacturing sector which has declined from an average of 7% to less than 3% in the past 5 years must be restored. Closed industries will be revived through appropriate and effective measures. This in turn will require a major infusion of capital either through foreign direct investment and domestic resources. We will ensure that ample credit is available to the private sector, interest rates are conducive borrowing and there is steady supply of energy to the industrial hubs.An important element of industrial revival will be the adoption of an export-led growth strategy supported by larger foreign direct investments. This policy is crucial to the development of the economy and will be pursued vigorously. Pakistan has remained dependent on cotton and textile sectors as its main earner in the international markets. Without incorporating value addition, technology and IT in our export base, we will not be able to achieve the required acceleration in exports. Tariffs will be reformed to eliminate the anti-export bias.
11
Our Industry and Trade policy will focus on the following: All exports will be sales tax free. A Technology Up-gradation Fund will be created in the public sector to support new investments in priority sectors. Private and public sector organizations will be brought together to establish an Equity Fund to encourage Pakistani companies to cater to niche markets through acquisitions of overseas brands and / or brand holding companies. Reduce the upfront cost of investment for prioritized sectors. Industrial parks, both for large and small industries will be developed and expanded, particularly in the under-developed areas. Clusters will be developed for industries such as gems and jewelry, leather, garments, fans, cutlery, halal meat, sports goods, furniture, crockery and cooking utensils. An Export-Import bank (EXIM) will be set up to deal exclusively with finances related to the export of capital goods and other manufactured items, consultancy and technological services involving deferred payment terms. This bank, like similar banks in other countries, will provide a wide range of services. Multinational Corporations (MNC’s) in Pakistan will be encouraged to expand their production facilities, not only to cater the Pakistani market but also the Central Asian, South Asian and Middle Eastern Markets. Necessary incentives and required infrastructure will be provided to these Corporations. The incentives will be linked to the flow of foreign capital to Pakistan by these companies. The investment strategy will be focused on encouraging buyers-driven FDI, under which those investors will be encouraged who are interested in using Pakistan as a base to manufacture products for exports where Pakistan has a comparative advantage. SME’s and Clusters will be developed in various districts where they will be facilitated through one window operation and through marketing companies which will promote their products within and outside the country.Over the past few years, a number of Regional Trading Arrangements
12
(RTAs), Bilateral Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) or Unilateral GSP type programmes have emerged. These arrangements place Pakistani exporters at a disadvantage vis-à-vis their competitors. Pakistan has to intensify participation in regional cooperation forums like SAARC and ECO, which include free or preferential trade arrangements. Other trading partners will also be urged to provide preferential access to Pakistani exports through lower or no duties. Our trade negotiations with international players including World Trade Organization (WTO) will be aimed at establishing a rule based and transparent global trading regime. In this way, we will succeed with our “Trade not Aid” policy.Infrastructure:PML(N)’s preferred policy will be to develop infrastructure projects through private sector on BOO / BOT (Build Own Operate/Build Operate Transfer) basis. In addition to the Public Sector Development Program (PSDP), we will encourage infrastructure building and financing institutions through public-private partnership to expedite infrastructure development. This has always been a hallmark priority for PML(N). As far as PSDP is concerned, initially our focus will be on the development of the agricultural, industrial, water, power, health and education sectors of the country. In the last few years, the federal government has significantly cut down its PSDP spending. Cutting development spending is, in fact, crippling the economy in the long term. PML(N) will ensure that we do not sacrifice our long term gains for the comfort of meeting our short term objectives. Cutting development spending is not a sustainable way to reduce the deficit.A Bureau of Infrastructure Development (BID) will be established to coordinate and oversee the programme for private sector participation in infrastructure development and develop financing schemes. BID will be a single window for the development of infrastructure projects, and will provide a mechanism for mobilizing commercial equity and debt
13
financing. An important objective of BID will be to improve transport and communication by constructing national trade corridors and providing mass transit facilities in all major cities.In most developed countries, major infrastructure projects have largely been developed by provinces and local governments by raising their own funds. This can be replicated in Pakistan through the issuance of Provincial and Municipal Infrastructure bonds or project specific bonds in order to develop secondary centers of Industrial activities. Development of well planned urban centers and cities can become a major engine of growth.The provincial and local governments will have to improve their financial position in order to improve their ratings by international credit rating agencies. Improved rating would enable the provinces to raise funds for major infrastructure development projects such as provincial highways, bridges, irrigation and power generation systems. It would also enable the local governments to develop municipal services by constructing ring roads, overhead bridges, underpasses, water supply and sewerage systems.Creation of Job Opportunities:All infrastructure projects will entail compulsory job creation. Institutions like Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund, Micro Financing Institutions and National & Provincial Rural Support Programmes will play a major role in eradicating poverty and creating jobs by expanding their operations. We will create incentive programmes for the private sector to create maximum employment. We will start a especially-designed employment program that will generate jobs at communityand neighborhood level through special development initiatives.Housing for Low Income Families:Special financial institutions and arrangements will also be made to expand, in cooperation with the provincial governments, housing
14
facilities especially for lower middle income groups. At least 1,000 clusters of 500 houses each for lower income families will be developed on a public private partnership mode, and the industry will be encouraged to expand investment and to provide employment opportunities in the adjoining areas. The PML(N) would strive to eventually provide a house to each Pakistani family through public-private partnership by expanding credit facilities for low-income housing and encouraging provincial governments to provide land for such housing schemes.Development of the housing sector will also benefit a large number of other industries and sub-sectors that provide construction materials. This will not only bring down the cost of construction, but also generate employment.Macro-Economic Stability:Sustained growth is not possible without macro- economic stability. Currently, central government borrowing from the commercial as well as State Bank is at an all time high. By the time the government and the public sector enterprises have met their requirements, there is virtually nothing left for the private sector. In 2011-12, only about 14% of total credit was provided to the private sector. This in turn has contributed to high fiscal deficit, low levels of investment, and higher dependence on borrowing. During the past five years, Pakistan has more than doubled its debt and the annual debt servicing has crossed Rs. 1,000 billion. Pakistan’s total public debt which was less than Rs. 3,000 billion on 30th June 1999 has increased to over Rs. 13,500 billion by the end of 2012. We will ensure that as a result of sound macro policies, public debt remains at sustainable level.The quasi-fiscal activity of the government outside the budget has contributed to a build-up of circular debt in the energy and agriculture commodity sectors. As a result, the cost of borrowing in the economy has increased again. This is a counterproductive exercise that will be stopped. During our second term from 1997 to 1999, the PML(N)
15
successfully curtailed the circular debt problem which it inherited from the previous regime. As substantiated in chapter 2 on Energy, we will completely resolve the issue of circular debt.In order to decrease the fiscal deficit, we will eliminate VIP culture and launch an austerity drive particularly expenses relating to the Presidency, Prime Minister, Governors and Chief Ministers will be significantly reduced. With the additional provincial autonomy under the 18th Amendment and the 7th NFC award, it is important that provinces follow prudent economic policies, particularly with respect to expenditure control and revenue generation. Reducing fiscal deficit is no more the exclusive domain of the federal government; the provinces must contribute their share. More autonomy must be accompanied with more accountability and responsibility.Tax Reforms:The structural drag on Pakistan’s economy can only be addressed through deep seated and institutional reforms. We are aware that the fundamental reforms that are required to address the ailing economy would be opposed by powerful interest groups and strong cartels. As demonstrated in its earlier stints at the federal level, PML(N) not only has the ability to make these fundamental institutional reforms, but also the political will to confront the strong and powerful interest groups.The most important area where fundamental and structural reforms are required is in the area of taxation. Tax collected by the federal government and provincial governments will ultimately determine the extent of investment in education, health, housing and infrastructure projects.When PML(N) government was dismissed in October 1999, tax to GDP ratio was a respectable 13.8 %, which has since declined and is presently around 9%. The high tax to GDP ratio was achieved in spite of significant reduction in personal and corporate income tax rates. Tax
16
rules were simplified, taxes made broad-based and the tax machinery more accountable and loop holes in the system effectively plugged.Through reforms in FBR and the tax system, we will target to improve the tax to GDP ratio to 15% by 2018. Informal economy will be brought into tax net. Tax base will be broadened.We recognize that in order to improve the overall taxation environment, documentation of economy is fundamental. Once the documentation process is successful, the informal economy can be brought into the tax net and the tax base rationalized to broaden the tax system.The basic objective of the Tax Reform Program of PML(N) will be:a) To tax all income and to achieve greater equity in the tax system by increasing dependence on direct taxes.b) To broad base the tax system through greater use of an IT data base.c) Reduce Tax evasion by facilitating tax payers’ compliance, and where possible, rationalizing tax rates.d) Reform of tax administration both at the federal and provincial levels.e) An annual tax directory will be published indicating the taxes paid and assessed in the last 3 years.f) No increase in the tax rates. Once the tax system becomes fully operational, tax rates will be reduced over a period of time to ensure regional equity and to encourage foreign investment.g) Provincial governments will be asked to increase their own tax revenues to increase their contribution in overall taxation.h) Sales tax to be rationalized by ensuring standard rate for all items and broadening the scope of sales tax.i) Simplify the administration of taxes and compliance especially for small businesses.j) Steps will be taken to ensure elimination of money laundering and whitening of black money.k) Knowing there are too many federal and provincial taxes , reduce
17
the number of federal and provincial taxes which will greatly reduce the discretion of the tax officials.l) Improve the process of self-assessment and audit compliance.m) To discourage import of luxury items, a regulatory duty will be levied on non essential imports.It is equally important to restore the sacred trust between the Government and the tax payers. Unless and until the citizens are convinced that the taxes they pay will be properly utilized for the benefit of the common man, it will be difficult to achieve Pakistan’s fiscal targets and macro-economic stability.State-owned Enterprises:Today, several key state-owned institutions like PIA, Railways, Pakistan Steel Mills, WAPDA and other institutions are a major drag on Pakistan’s economy. These loss-making entities are presently bleeding to the tune of Rs. 400 billion per annum. Therefore, reforming these state owned institutions through a combination of privatization and restructuring is fundamental. PML(N) government in its two tenures in the 90’s had demonstrated its ability to transform the loss making institutions. Only in the banking sector, institutions such as HBL, UBL and National Bank were completely turned around in less than 2 years between 1997 and 1999. Earlier in its first term, major banks such as MCB & ABL were privatized. Today, they are premier banks in Pakistan and contributing billions towards the national exchequer.PML(N) will initiate following actions to turn around the loss making state enterprises: Appoint independent and professional boards who in turn will appoint competent CEOs of state enterprises. Professional competence and merit will be the only criteria for appointment of boards and CEOs. The immediate task of the boards and CEOs will be to manage these corporations effectively and to plug the losses.
18
 Assign quantifiable targets and monitor on regular basis. Performance evaluation will be carried out on regular basis to ensure accountability. Stop every kind of political interference in the affairs of these enterprises. Undertake deep-seated and urgent reforms in the relevant sub-sectors. Identify enterprises which need to be privatized and assign targets to the privatization commission to ensure completion of the privatization process within the assigned time frame. Operational standards will be prescribed and complete autonomy will be given to achieve them. PIA shall be transformed into a profitable and reputed airline of the Region.There will be special focus on Pakistan Railways to improve its operations. It has strategic importance as well as favored mode of transportation for the common man and cargo carriages. A fully autonomous board will be set up to oversee the working of Railways.Other Financial Sector Reforms:PML(N) in continuation of far reaching reforms in the banking sector in 1990’s will undertake further reforms in line with current domestic and global requirements. At present profitability is affected by the higher cost of borrowing combined with expensive energy. This inevitably leads to a declining saving rate, which at present is only 10.8%, stifled growth, a crumbling manufacturing sector, rising unemployment and poverty. A vibrant financial sector supported by reforms in the capital market is vital for the revival of business confidence and private investment. With said reforms resulting into substantial new investment in the corporate sector, it would generate employment in the country.
19
Revival of Confidence:One of the most important pre-conditions for economic revival is the restoration of confidence of the business community and other stakeholders in the future of the country. To achieve this important objective, PML(N) will engage the business community in decision making, ensure steady supply of energy, provide fiscal incentives to improve competitiveness, reduce the cost of doing business and accord high priority to the export sector and small and medium enterprises in rural areas. The promotion of IT, tourism and other knowledge-based sub-sectors will be accorded high priority. To ensure closer consultation and cooperation with the business community, various mechanisms and institutions will also be strengthened.Pakistan will face extraordinary risks in the coming decade due to the global financial crisis that has plagued the world economy since 2008 and the resultant decline in the demand for products that Pakistan exports. These risks are further compounded by environmental risks associated with global warming and climate change and societal risks emerging from the rise of extremism in the Region. PML(N) is fully aware that hardly any country has ever achieved sustained progress without internal and external stability. It is, therefore, determined to create a secure environment for investment and economic activities by minimizing these risks through concerted policies and actions in consultation with all the stakeholders.To build confidence of private sector, Pakistan Business and Economic Council shall be established, chaired by the Prime Minister, with equal membership of public and private sector for monitoring performance of economy. The Council shall meet every quarter.
20
EnergySecurity:ContinuousAvailabilityandAffordability
21
Energy Security:Continuous Availability and AffordabilityReliable and reasonably priced energy is vital for the economic and social development of Pakistan. Yet, after 65 years of independence, the nation is facing a shortage of over 6,000 MW and at least 40% of Pakistan’s population does not have access to electricity. Those that do have access only get sporadic supply with frequent power outages.The situation for natural gas is even more worrisome, where only a fifth of the population has access to piped natural gas, and there are long and sustained periods in winters when gas is not available in many parts of the country. The curse of load shedding in electricity was a legacy from the previous dictatorial regime, but load shedding in gas has started under the present government. With current trends the total gas production will fall from the present level of around 4,000 MMCFD to only 1,000 MMCFD by the year 2024–25. This will require import to cover 80–85% of the gas required in the country. Urgent steps are therefore needed to develop new gas fields and import infrastructure.Pakistan is blessed with enormous natural energy resources. The Thar Desert contains, at 175 billion tons, the world’s fifth largest coal reserves, enough to fuel power plants with 100,000 MW of capacity for over 100 years. Pakistan also has proven oil reserves of 300 million barrels, and natural gas reserves in the deeper layers of existing fields in Baluchistan are reported to be larger than those currently being exploited. Also, if sustainably marshaled, our rivers have potential hydropower capacity of at least 40,000 MW.Despite all these resources, our energy crisis continues to worsen and has become an impediment to our economic development and is causing unbearable suffering to the common man. The annual cost of load-shedding was estimated in 2010 at Rs.500 billion (US$ 5 billion),
22
a loss of a million jobs and at least US$ 2.8 billion reduction in exports. It will be difficult to identify another example of collective national failure of policies and governance of this magnitude.In order to understand what has gone wrong, at least five glaring failures of the present government can be identified:a) The PPP led coalition has almost doubled electricity prices in the past four years to eliminate subsidies but because of poor governance and inability to improve the efficiency of the energy sector, the losses have actually increased and the energy crisis has become more serious. Production, transmission and distribution losses have increased and the distribution companies have been unable to recover their full dues (arrears estimated at Rs. 499 billion in 2012) or reduce theft of electricity. This has led to a chronic so called ‘circular debt problem’ of Rs. 500 billion in 2012.b) The Government has not been able to modernize existing thermal units to improve their generating capacity which was possible at relatively low cost. Instead, it opted for several high cost rental power projects to add very expensive electricity to the system.c) There has been virtually no progress in attracting investment in the energy sector, especially in hydel or coal based projects to correct the fuel mix.d) For the first time, Pakistan has experienced the menace of gas load shedding. Yet the government has neither increased the speed of gas exploration nor made concrete efforts to import gas.e) Overall lack of competence and the political will to address the sufferings of people of Pakistan as reflected in political appointments instead of merit-based selections in Public Sector Enterprises and the inability to reduce losses and recover arrears.PML(N) has a clear energy vision to ensure that gas and electricity can be supplied to all urban and rural consumers continuously at an
23
affordable price. We will also ensure that energy resources are allocated through regulated market forces and not for personal financial gains of the powerful. Large-scale investment in the energy sector can create thousands of new jobs and contribute to social, educational, economic and industrial development.This multi- dimensional energy crisis will require effective and sustainable solutions through short-term measures and medium-term plans which must be undertaken in a coordinated manner; not just plan to fill the gap of 6000 MW capacity that exists today, but plan for the increased demand that our growing population and growing economy will generate. PML(N) will take the following decisive steps to resolve the energy crisis:1) Creation of a Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources through the merger of Ministries of Water and Power and Petroleum and Natural Resources.2) Reforms of National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (NEPRA):a) Upfront / Feed-in tariffs for wind, solar, small hydel, and biomass projects.b) Mandatory wheeling of electricity by DISCOs and the NTDC.c) Net metering (sale guarantee) for small producers/ consumers.d) NEPRA determined tariffs to be the notified tariffs.e) Deregulating and decentralizing the energy sector by allowing small power producers to sell power directly to consumers through the distribution systems of DISCOs. NEPRA (or regional regulators) to allow and regulate prices.3) Reforms of Distribution Companies (DISCOs):a) Corporatization and privatization of DISCOs.b) Ending of cross subsidy among DISCOs.c) Transmission and Distribution losses to be progressively
24
brought under 10%.d) Collection of electricity bills to be brought as close to 100% of billing as possible.e) Introduction of prepaid billing system to improve bill collection and reducing bad debts.4) Reforms of Generating Companies (GENCOs):a) Corporatization and privatization of each GENCO under an independent Board.b) Retrofitting of all equipment to ensure that thermal efficiency is raised to the original specification and where required converting all simple cycle plants to combined cycle technology. This will cost US$ 300 to US$ 400 million only but increase production capacity by 600 MW, thus giving more than 3,000 GWh (or 3 billion units) of electricity at zero marginal cost. Payback period of this investment is about one year.c) Replacement of all furnace oil boilers by coal fired boilers. This will cost around US$ 2 billion (for all GENCOs and IPPs furnace oil fired boilers) and again the payback period is less than two years. This will result in substantial reduction in the cost of energy production even if, at first, imported coal is used.5) Permanent elimination of circular debt.It is important to understand that what is called “circular debt” has very little circular component and much of the debt is due to system-wide losses incurred by GENCOs and DISCOs. Therefore we will take the following immediate measures:a) Narrowly target tariff subsidies only to lifeline consumers who consume up to 100 units per month, and provide for this subsidy in the federal budget.b) Notify electricity tariffs according to the average system-wide cost.c) Power dispatch to be strictly according to plant efficiency
25
and generation cost.d) Supply gas to all power plants that can run on natural gas to minimize generation on expensive fuels.e) Convert all furnace oil-fired power plants to coal-firedboilers.f )	Reduce distribution and transmission losses and improve collection rates.6) Rationalization of energy tariffs in line with international prices across all fuels.7) Reforms of Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority (OGRA):a) Blanket ban on the setting up of new CNG stations until the gas crisis is resolved.b) Priority to public transport in the use of CNG.c) Narrowly targeted subsidy for the poor for natural gas and LPG.d) Tariff rationalization in gas sector.8) Aggressive wellhead pricing for Oil and Gas exploration companies in order to substantially increase production of oil and gas.9) High priority to import gas through pipelines.10) Expeditious setting up of coal and LNG import terminals, and coal transportation facilities.11) Development of Thar coalfields and setting up of at least 5,000 MW of new coal fired power plants under the IPP mode in Sindh. This will both create employment in rural Sindh and help solve our energy crisis. The plants to be designed on lignite quality coal and at first to be run on imported coal and when Thar coal is available, the plants to be switched to domestic coal.12) Developing consensus among the various stakeholders to facilitate setting up hydropower projects by the Federal and Provincial Governments. This will augment and conserve our water resources and also generate less expensive and clean
26
electricity.13) Developing alternative renewable energy sources, such as solar, wind, bagasse, biogas, and biomass projects, especially for off-grid and micro-grid applications.14) Setting up national energy efficiency standards.15) Introducing solar-thermal water heaters for domestic and industrial use.16) Decentralizing and creating a wholesale market for electricity.What we envisage is to tackle circular debt and system losses − on priority in order to end load shedding in minimum time and in 5 years there will be a market for wholesale trade of electricity and most importantly consumers, using the distribution network of the local DISCOs and the transmission network of the national grid will be able to buy electricity from their preferred producer. And once there is enough competition in the market, neither government guarantees nor government subsidies will be required and prices will start to go down as they have in the mobile telephone market.These measures will not only solve our lingering energy crisis but also shift the focus of the energy sector from high cost imported fuels to indigenous energy resources and reduce the total energy import bill and add at least 3.5% to the annual GDP. At the same time investment of about US$ 20 billion to generate 10,000 MW of electricity in the next 5 years will stimulate overall growth of the economy.
27
Agricultureand FoodSecurity
28
Agriculture and Food SecurityAgriculture with a contribution of 21% to national GDP is the single largest sector of the economy and provides employment to more than half the country’s labour force. Agriculture and agro based products account for 70% of total export earnings and the sector supplies many of the industries with raw materials. In turn the sector consumes more than 40% of industrial finished goods.With a major expansion of water supply through tube wells for irrigation in the 1970’s and 1980’s, the total cropped area has increased by one third to 24 million hectare, yielding an average annual agricultural growth rate of 5.4% in 1980’s and 4.4% in the 1990’s. This growth rate slowed down to 3.2% in the decade of 2000 due to adverse terms of trade but overall the agriculture sector remains an efficient user of domestic resources both as a provider of additional employment opportunities and as a producer of goods for consumption and for exports. With efficient use of modern technologies there is considerable scope for increasing agriculture productivity in the coming years.To accelerate the pace of agriculture development and to reduce poverty by diversifying the rural economy to expand non–farm employment, PML(N) will undertake the following specific programmes and measures for the integrated development of agriculture, livestock, fisheries, horticulture and forestry: Turn agriculture into a fully-viable economic industry by changing the policy framework and terms of trade in favor of agriculture; Focus on small farmers as the real back-bone of the rural economy and assure their access to knowledge, inputs and markets; Give high priority to development of the livestock sector and self sufficiency in oilseeds, as a part of an overall program to fisheries and horticulture crops like fruits, vegetables and dates
29
will be given special incentives. Revitalize corporate agriculture to overcome the limitation of the small land owners by setting up land development corporations with majority equity of the poor and managed by professional managers. Reform the agriculture credit system to ensure that at least 50% of the total is provided to small farmers and that land owners are able to obtain credit on the basis of the market value of the land rather than outdated produce index units. High priority to women borrowers in micro credit programmes. Convert Pakistan into a large net exporter of food and high-value crops to regional markets by modernizing post-harvest storage and marketing systems. There is very large demand for halal products in these markets. Build consensus on the basis of the 1991 Water Accord to allow new water projects to be undertaken and extension of irrigation facilities to additional areas. Increase irrigation intensity through fuller utilization of available water resources by expanding the on-farm water management programmes, and generating hydel electricity on a large scale from local water reservoirs and small dams. Launch major programme of aquifer recharge in arid and semi-arid areas of Cholistan, Thar and Baluchistan to ensure that water flows from tube wells installed in these areas can be sustained. Provide incentives for farmers to adopt social forestry on a commercial scale rather than depend on restrictive laws for this purpose particularly in border areas. Undertake immediate updating of revenue and property records using modern Information Technology. Based on the information so generated ‘benamis’ can be eliminated, property rights of female members protected, and better access to credit facilitated. Revamp all agriculture research organizations to ensure that there is sustained increase in productivity to meet the demands of a growing population and that the benefits of research
30
actually reach the farmers. Intensify research efforts to reduce the energy intensity of the agriculture sector to bring down the cost of production which has gone up due to high petroleum prices. Modernize agriculture education in general and curriculum of agriculture universities in particular. Under its land reform programme, PML(N) will reclaim and irrigate additional land for allotment to landless, women haris and tenants. It will also undertake a land consolidation programme to create viable units for modern agriculture.Environmental Protection:PML(N) will give high priority to ecologically sound development policies to preserve and develop the country’s natural and forest resources to counteract the impact of global warming and fight the cancer of water-logging and salinity.There is need for a coherent strategy across all our provinces to deal with the climate change threat facing Pakistan. Natural disasters do not stop at provincial boundaries and nor should their response be disjointed. Past natural disaster remnants like floods and earthquake affectees will be rehabilitated adequately. Prioritization of routes destroyed in natural disasters will be undertaken. Model villages will be built in all natural disaster zones to reduce discrimination.Food Security:Research across the world has shown that food security cannot be ensured only by increasing the availability of food through higher agricultural production. It also requires better access to food. In other words, the objective of food security cannot be achieved unless and until the issue of poverty is also addressed. In the past 5 years, the proportion of population living below the poverty line, according to several independent research studies, increased from 34% in 2007 to 40% in 2012. A drastic reduction in poverty levels
31
has thus become the most important development challenge for the next government.PML(N) will seek Parliamentary approval for adding a new article to the Constitution to make the ‘Right to Food’ a fundamental right of every citizen within a reasonable time frame.To implement the ‘Right to Food’ policy, the government will formulate, in consultation with the provincial governments, a National Strategy For Food Security to achieve an average agricultural growth of at least 4% per annum in the next decade, evolve an equitable system of food procurement and distribution, improve the access of poor households to food at affordable prices and evolve a transparent system of safety nets for very poor households.It is also clear from Pakistan’s own experience that marginal adjustments in development policies will not address the issue of mass poverty. A paradigm shift will be needed to evolve pro-poor growth strategies that will change institutions and local power structures in favor of the poor, by giving them greater access to productive assets such as land and livestock and facilities for acquired education and skills. Other important elements of such a pro-poor growth strategy will be increasing non-farm employment in rural areas through small and medium enterprises and greater stability in food prices.Social Protection:PML(N) will launch a coherent social protection plan to protect the poorer segments of society from the adverse effects of inflation and national disasters. Main elements of such a programme will include the following: Ensure universal access to affordable food grains in all parts of the country by legislating the “Right to Food” as a fundamental right. Strengthen the procurement programme to ensure all farmers
32
receive the guaranteed support price for grains and improve arrangements for storage and subsidized distribution to ensure relative price stability throughout the year. Introduce a transparent system of income support programme for needy families with incomes below the prescribed limit with a special focus on widows, orphans and the girl child. Adequate monitoring mechanisms will be established to ensure that resources under these income support programmes are not misused. Education scholarships will be provided to orphans, disabled and other needy students for acquiring skills and higher education. Concept of social entrepreneurship will be introduced to ensure that the vulnerable communities who have been granted additional cash grant for supporting their limited income – do not end being counterproductive. It is reported that some of the cash assistance beneficiaries stop making conscious effort for success in life after getting use of receiving easy money of Income Support Programme at home. Replace most untargeted subsidies with targeted subsidies and establish dynamic mechanisms for targeting to ensure that the system is transparent and verifiable. Create public-private partnership to take full advantage of the capacity already built by a large number of community organizations to respond to emergencies and national calamities. Undertake special labor-intensive employment programmes especially in areas affected by insurgency and natural disasters based on small infrastructure or rehabilitation projects which are identified in consultation with the target communities.In cooperation with the Provinces, the PML(N) Government will raise the total spending on non-pension social protection from the current level of 1% of GDP to at least 2% by 2018..
33
A New Framework for Social Change
34
A New Framework for Social ChangePakistan needs a new framework for social change to provide equal opportunities and social justice to everyone, eliminate exploitation of the poor, harness its human resource potential and restore the dignity of the citizen.PML(N)’s social agenda includes not only the vital sectors of Education and Health but also other important dimensions like empowerment of women and youth, speedy justice, and good governance at federal, provincial and local levels in order to revive the economy and restore the balance of power in favor of the people.Such an integrated programme of social development can create and broaden partnerships between different segments of society, reduce injustice and intolerance society and helps to achieve the Millennium Development Goals 2015.Education:With knowledge becoming the key driver of socio-economic development in the 21st century, Education must become number one national priority. This phenomenal change should occur not just in policy statements but also in terms of financial allocations, institutional reforms, effective implementation of policies and an effective external monitoring and evaluation system. To respond to the challenges of knowledge revolution and globalization, we need an education system that promotes creativity, analytical thinking, team work and strong ethical foundations.Education is also the greatest single equalizer in a society and universal education is one of the most important means of reducing mass poverty. An educated, technologically advanced and progressive society is the need and aspiration of the people of Pakistan.More than half the country’s population is below 25 years. Educated and properly trained youth can become the driving force of progress
35
and prosperity, but this demographic dividend can become a demographic challenge if the youth are not provided opportunities for education and employment. Education is therefore the key to this huge reservoir of talent towards dynamism, knowledge-economy and social change.Pakistan has finally taken a historic step forward to make the ‘Right to Education’ a fundamental right by adding a new Article 25-A to the Constitution under the 18th Constitutional Amendment passed in April 2010. Pakistan Muslim League (N) is determined to bring about an educational revolution in the country by taking following steps: National Education Emergency will be declared to eradicate illiteracy on war footing basis A national literacy movement will be launched in which volunteers from all the segments of society will be motivated to participate. In consultation with the provinces, initiate legislation to provide a road map for achieving 100% enrollment up to the middle level and 80% universal literacy and strive to meet the target of ‘Education For All (EFA)’ and ‘Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)’ related to education within the given time frame. A vision 2025 for Pakistan’s education system shall be formulated. The vision aims at transforming Pakistani education system to be among world’s best. This would be based on the aspirations of the people, the ideology of Pakistan, and new learning methods technologies - recognizing education as a right of every job market needs, citizen providing equal and ample opportunity to all its citizens to make themselves knowledgeable, skilful, productive, creative, confident and committed to moral values. A uniform system of education will be introduced step by step to minimize the problems arising from the multiplicity of systems. Drop out rate at primary level will be reduced by providing missing facilities in schools and free text books, offering incentives, especially for girls.
36
 Facilities for teacher training will be expanded at a rapid pace in collaboration with the Provincial Governments to improve the quality of education and ensure a quality teacher in every classroom. At present with only 170 teacher training institutions (including 26 in the private sector) and total enrolment of 650,000, we are training less than 10% of all our teachers. Teaching at all levels will be made an attractive profession. Efforts will be made to bring in high caliber teachers by offering better salary, improved service structure and other benefits. Training and refresher courses will be conducted at all levels and their promotion will be linked with their qualifications and performance. The selection of teachers shall be purely on merit through a transparent selection process. There is a need for developing a national strategy for skill-based uniform curriculum to meet the changing requirements of the economy and also to provide harmony among provinces. The Federal government will assist and coordinate efforts of the provincial governments to improve and standardize curricula in different subjects. National Curriculum Council shall be established comprising of eminent public and private sectors experts to review national curriculum and bring it to international standards to promote analytical thinking, creativity, team work, curiosity for learning, ethics and values. Increased resources will be allocated for education sector ensuring proper and timely utilization of funds to reach the UNESCO target of 4% of GDP by 2018. Fiscal incentives and other support will be provided to encourage private investment in secondary, vocational and higher education in the country. In making, Federal transfers the principle of matching grants will be adopted to ensure that Provincial Governments also earmark adequate resources for education. Maximum facilities for science education will be provided in all parts of the country by upgrading and providing liberal grants for science laboratories in all secondary schools. Centers for
37
professional excellence in various scientific disciplines will also be promoted by providing highly qualified teachers and generous scholarships for training abroad. National and provincial level science competitions shall be organized to identify young talent. Computer labs shall be established in all the government high schools in the first phase. All merit students in public universities shall be provided laptops to link them with the digital revolution. Instruction of foreign languages shall be introduced in national curriculum to meet the challenges of globalization. Student career counseling services shall be introduced in schools, colleges and universities. Danish Schools shall be set up in all provinces. Education Endowment Funds shall be set up in all provinces to award merit scholarships to poor and needy students for higher education. The Higher Education Commission will be given greater autonomy and the required financial resources to ensure adequate standards in Higher Education and inter provincial coordination in such matters as curriculum and scientific research. Technology Development Fund shall be established for HEC scholars returning after completion of PhD to introduce new technologies application in Pakistan. Vice Chancellors of all public sector universities shall be appointed through a transparent merit based process through Search Committees. The standards in universities shall be raised to transform them into world class universities. Additional higher educational institutions will be established in public and private sectors, especially in remote areas to increase enrolment in higher education. Linkage of universities will be established with top ranked universities of the world. Incentives will be given to encourage research in higher educational institutions. Vocational and technical education will be promoted, especially in rural areas. Efforts will be made to integrate vocational
38
training with mainstream education to meet the needs of our youth interested in following technical careers. At least one world class technology university will also be established in every province, and priority will be given to expand distance learning programmes in public and private sector educational institutions. Madrassas will be provided financial assistance and other incentives to bring their syllabus and standards in conformity with the mainstream education to improve the employment prospects of Madrassa students. Also, vocational training will be offered to them to encourage them to become entrepreneurs. Education sector monitoring will be strengthened through autonomous monitoring and evaluations authorities and use of modern technology to check the performance of education sector. Examination system will be improved by making it more transparent, reliable and in line with international standards. National Testing Service will be strengthened. ‘Reading culture’ will be promoted by developing libraries at national, provincial and district levels equipped with modern reference tools. Facilities for art, culture and sports will be expanded and competitions shall be introduced at school level as extra curricular activities. A detailed action plan will be formulated to upgrade the capacity of provincial governments for the effective handling of additional responsibilities entrusted to them under the 18th Amendment, including institutional restructuring to improve educational administration through a Provincial Commission for Higher Education and Establishment of autonomous District Education Authorities (DEAs). Special education institutions shall be expanded to enable special children to attend schools. Schools for Overseas Pakistani children to be transformed into top quality education institutions. These shall be strengthened through merit based transparent appointments, management and infrastructure.
39
High quality education can play a significant role in developing world class human capital, only if it is accompanied by opportunities for entrepreneurship and innovation and a system which allows merit to prevail in all spheres of national life.Health:Health delivery system in Pakistan is extremely inadequate. Basic medical facilities are non-existent, especially in rural areas. Hospitals are over- crowded and public awareness about primary health care is very poor. PML(N) will aim at a three fold increase in the overall expenditure on Health to at least 2% of GDP by 2018, as recommended by the United Nations. High priority will be accorded to a preventive health strategy to minimize costs of healthcare.PML(N) will introduce a comprehensive National Health Service across Pakistan with participation of the private sector. Salient features of the National Health Service are outlined below: A new National Health Insurance Scheme will be introduced for the whole of Pakistan. Initially the scheme shall cover the most vulnerable poorest segment of the population. A new National Health Insurance card scheme will be introduced to avail basic healthcare in a government hospital or by a general practitioner at concessional rates initially, the scheme shall cover the most vulnerable and poor segments of the population. This facility will be free for children under 12 in full-time education, senior citizens over 65 and families with low income. Better off citizens will be able to receive medical cards by paying the prescribed annual fee of Rs. 100 per person or Rs. 300 per family. Existing Computerized National Identity Cards of beneficiaries shall be replaced with smart cards detailing coverage details and usage for each family covered under the programme. Entire programme would thus be managed through state of art IT applications. Coverage of Rs. 150,000 per annum would be provided for
40
each covered family for meeting indoor treatment, inclusive of surgeries. Participating hospitals shall receive payments from Insurance companies. Premiums to Insurance companies shall be paid by the provincial government. Programme shall be managed by provincial governments. Existing Basic Health Units will be strengthened and where possible leased to private Medical practitioners in public–private partnership mode. Help will be provided to qualified doctors who wish to set up new clinics. Each District will have a District Healthcare Authority (DHA) which will manage the health system under a semi-autonomous Board of Governors (BoG) consisting of eminent community representatives and professionals. The authority will also manage hospitals in their respective districts. Each District will have at least one hospital with complete diagnostic facilities and specialist in required fields. It will also have an institute for the training of paramedics and health technicians. At least 1,000 mobile health units will be launched to provide basic health facilities to remote areas and isolated localities. These will be manufactured locally to reduce cost and creating employment opportunities. Critical care units shall be established in each Tehsil headquarters’ hospital. Medical colleges and teaching hospitals will also become fully autonomous bodies managed by their respective Board of Governors for professional and administrative autonomy. Provincial Governments will be encouraged to provide an efficient medico-legal service. For this purpose facilities for legal and forensic studies will be expanded in Medical Colleges. The basic aim of the health programme will be to achieve, within 5 years, 100% vaccination of children, 50% reduction in maternal and infant mortality and at least 10% reduction in the rate of population growth. Provision of clean drinking water and safe sewerage disposal will be given high priority to control diseases like Diarrhea and
41
Hepatitis. Schemes like Orangi Pilot Project will be replicated throughout Pakistan to seek community participation in the provision of services like water supply and sewerage at reduced costs. Aggressive educational campaigns shall be launched to control diabetes, hepatitis, HIV, and cardiac disorders. Private sector will be encouraged to expand pharmaceutical manufacturing and setup manufacturing of diagnostic equipment so that cheap and effective treatment is available to the people. An independent Drug and Food Administration will be set up to enforce proper standards, check spurious drugs and regulate prices of medicines to keep them within affordable limits. Effective hospital hygiene and waste disposal programmes shall be introduced. Well-being of senior citizens and handicapped persons will be ensured by special facilities, preferential access and concessions. Special quotas will also be earmarked in jobs and educational institutions for handicapped persons. Special arrangements will be made to monitor public health issues.Women:In Islam, women enjoy a place of honor and dignity that is unparalleled in history. The place of both men and women in the society is acknowledged in Islam. It is for this reason that acquiring knowledge has been ordained for both. PML(N) shall: Ensure respect, dignity, and protection granted by Islam to women and protect their property rights. Promote participation of women in national development and their social, political and economic empowerment by recognizing their role as agents of change. Give preference to women teachers in primary education. Promote female education especially vocational skills training and healthcare programmes to overcome gender gaps.
42
 Enact or improve legislation on violence against women and child abuse, and eliminate illegal and unjust practices under which women are discriminated. Expand micro credit for female borrowers substantially as a part of the empowerment process, combined with special house building credit facilities for widows. An integrated population welfare programme is required across Pakistan so as to maximize the demographic dividend and avoid a demographic disaster. A key element of this program will be improved female literacy. Steps will also be taken to increase women’s participation ratios in financial institutions, superior judiciary, health and educational management and law enforcement agencies at executive level. Inheritance and property rights of female heirs shall be safeguarded. Institutional mechanism against harassment of women at workplace shall be enforced. Day Care facilities will be established to support working women to make workplaces women friendly. “Women Entrepreneurship Financing Scheme” shall be launched to promote women entrepreneurship.Youth:Youth is Pakistan’s future. More than 63 percent of our population is less than 25 years of age. PML(N) believes that it is our youth which, if given proper education and skills, can change the destiny of the nation. In order to reap this demographic dividend a dynamic new National Youth Policy will be implemented with the following important features: Youth training and skill development programme shall be initiated to create one million positions for apprenticeship in trade and industry, in collaboration with the private sector to ensure at least one job for every low income family. Necessary legislation to make it compulsory for major industries and service providers to ensure proper vocational training for
43
their workers will be enacted along with fiscal incentives. Self-employment loans shall be extended to those who complete training / apprenticeship, especially in the information technology and other knowledge-based sectors. Services of youth will be utilized in implementation of national literacy programmes. To involve youth in governance at the local level, special seats will be reserved for them in the Union Councils and District Councils to prepare them for a bigger role in National and Provincial Assemblies. Inter-provincial visits of youth delegations in various disciplines shall be organized through domestic tourism and exchanges. Anti-addiction campaign shall be launched to protect youth from drugs abuse.Sports:PML(N) is fully conscious of the importance sporting activities play in improving the health and mindset of its people and the decline in Sports and Exercise in recent years. It commits to depoliticize sports bodies, bring professional managements significantly improve the allocations for various sports bodies and providing other incentive to give Pakistan glory in sporting arenas. It also intends to provide scholarships to various educational institutions for the youth excelling in sports. Special focus will be given to encourage sporting activities among women and special persons. Under a phased programme, modern gymnasia will be constructed at the District and Tehsil levels.Minorities:The PML(N) considers religious minorities of the country as equal citizens of Pakistan having the same rights as Muslims. As ordained by Islam and the Constitution of Pakistan, the Minorities will have
44
complete freedom of worshiping and the right to education and employment in all sectors of the economy. Over the years as Pakistan’s security situation has deteriorated, an some areas minorities have come under increasing attacks. The current unrest and anxiety being felt by minority communities due to discrimination or repression in certain parts of Pakistan is very unfortunate. There are reports of forced conversions and other acts of intimidation. This situation will be addressed through decisive steps to restore their confidence.Specific measures for providing equal opportunities to minorities will include the following: National Day for Minorities to be celebrated to promote integration, brotherhood and harmony so that the sense of deprivation is removed. Necessary legislative measures will be undertaken to ensure there is no forced conversion of religion in the guise of marriage. Minority representation to be increased in the Evacuee Trust Property Board (ETPB). Quota to be introduced for minorities in educational institution and public sector jobs including diplomatic missions. The Christian community will be permitted to run their own schools and colleges. The development funds earmarked for minorities will be doubled. The Hindu Marriage Bill will be accelerated through the National Assembly. Minorities may be given official leave and advance salary to celebrate their religious festivities in whichever province they are.
45
Democratic Governance
46
Democratic GovernancePML(N) is deeply committed to the following principles of democratic governance as outlined in the “Charter of Democracy” signed on May 14, 2006 in London between the leadership of PPP and PML(N):“Noting our responsibility to our people to set an alternative direction for the country, saving it from its present predicaments on an economically sustainable, socially progressive, politically democratic and pluralist, federally cooperative, ideologically tolerant, internationally respectable and regionally peaceful basis in the larger interests of the people of Pakistan, to decide once for all that only the people and no one else has the sovereign right to govern through their elected representatives, as conceived by the democrat par excellence Father of the Nation Quaid-e-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah.”Lack of effective governance not only slows down the pace of economic growth but also has a disproportionately large negative impact on poor people due to polluted air, unclean water, high inflation and poor delivery of public services. The concept of Democratic Governance goes beyond the narrow definition of good governance to focus on the needs and aspiration of the common people.Democratic Governance requires mutually reinforcing progress on all the three dimension of governance, i.e. political governance economic governance and civic governance, as outlined in different chapters of this Manifesto.The political dimension of democratic governance requires strong institutions like an effective parliament, independent judiciary and Election Commission and a vigilant media. It also requires a decentralized political system which ensures the supremacy of elected representatives at all levels.Role of Parliamentary Standing Committees shall be strengthened for effective Parliamentary oversight. “An Ethics Committee at district
47
level shall monitor performance of its office bearers and elected representatives”. Reforms to strengthen criminal justice system shall be taken for speedy justice.The economic dimension of democratic governance requires a system that provides equal opportunities to all the citizens through equitable access to education, skill, income generating assets credit and public services in all parts of the country.The civic dimension of democratic governance includes cooperation between the state and the civil society. The civil society can strengthen democracy and governance by empowering the common man, demanding transparency and accountability and enforcing improved standards of public services at all levels, right to information law based on international best practices shall be passed to give every citizen the right to know and to build institutional mechanism to increase access to information.Local Government:Apart from consolidating democratic institutions and traditions at the federal and provincial level, the imperative of democratic governance can be fulfilled only through further decentralization by devolving administrative and financial powers to elected representatives at district and lower levels.Unfortunately, Pakistan has not so far been able to evolve a viable and sustainable system of local governments because during each period of military rule, military dictators introduced a new system of local bodies to serve their own political agenda. Such a system naturally could not survive the transition from military to civilian rule.PML(N) is fully committed to devolve political, administrative and financial responsibility and authority to elected representatives of local governments, under Article 140-A of the Constitution, adopted under the 18th Amendment. Local Government Elections shall be held within six months of general elections.
48
In implementing Article 140-A, every effort will be made to secure a certain degree of uniformity in the local government system within and among provinces so that democracy at the doorstep is the same for people in all parts of Pakistan under a sustainable system.PML(N) will also ensure that the new laws providing for a new local bodies system in replacement of the 2002 system are adopted by consensus and that they provide for optimum devolution and decentralization of administrative and financial powers. Adequate representation will be given in local bodies to women, peasants, workers, technocrats, minorities and for the first time youth who will thus be involved in local governance at an early stage. Arrangements will also be made for Provinces to learn from each other’s experience.Civil Service Reforms:Reforms of the civil services will be undertaken at all levels to ensure better governance and improved delivery of services to the public. Much needs to be done to build a strong, efficient and professional civil service.Pakistan is a complex society and needs to initiate a unique and bold attempt to reform its Civil Services system. It will be one of the key components of a larger attempt to fundamentally restructure the country’s state apparatus for democratic governance. The basic thrust of the plan will be both a major Public Sector Government Transformation Program as well as a major overhaul of the federal civil service. Main purpose and objective of Civil Service Reforms will be:	Ensuring open government through transparency, accountability, and participation to fight corruption and improve citizen engagement. Transforming public service into a highly capable service provider by promoting merit based system at all levels through improvements in recruitment, postings, promotion, training and incentives. Turning public sector into High Performance Organizations by
49
introducing result-based management to impact performance and service delivery with a focus on quality, productivity, evidence based planning, business process reform, restructuring of government ministries and departments, citizen charters, and policy integration and evaluation. Harnessing new technologies for efficiency and effectiveness gains by deepening e-governance with a focus on leveraging Information & Communication Technology (ICT), Geographic Information System (GIS) tools and mobile technology. Creating responsive public sector by decentralizing service delivery functions to district level in pursuance of the constitutional mandate to pursue devolution. Mobilizing resources by enhancing revenues, increasing expenditure efficiency with a focus on e-procurement, professional project management, and performance based budgeting to maximize value for money. Promoting pubic-private partnerships in production, service delivery and infrastructure services. Building strategic policy development and implementation capability, foster innovations through promoting knowledge sharing, knowledge management, collaborations with academia and private sector, and targeted allocations. Developing leadership for results and introducing modern management practices / skills by reforming and strengthening public sector training institutions.It is equally important to evolve a strategic vision aimed at effectively strengthening rather than eroding state capacity by developing a comprehensive and holistic system for human resource management in which recruitment, training, career planning and performance evaluation become part of a coherent system.Technical and scientific tools for governance can be of great help in improving the efficiency and management of the affairs of the state like computerization system for property documentation and transactions. These will improve governance and reduce corruption. Land record
50
computerization project shall be extended to all provinces.Taking government to the people and developing their ownership is the way forward. Local problems need local participation and local solutions through elected representatives at district and lower levels. Special attention is needed for capacity building especially at provincial and district levels.An Early Warning System is required to be put in place an adequate framework for monitoring and prevention of crises and for relief operations. This system will be able to alert the executive, policy and law makers in time to tackle the emerging crisis and help take preventive measures.Police Reforms:Police laws will be reviewed to transform the police force into a depoliticized, efficient and effective law-enforcement body, which is highly motivated, trained and provided with modern / computerized investigative technology, including updated forensic facilities. This will include improvements in the “thana culture” to remove difficulties faced by the complainants to register FIRs and to safeguard against harassment of innocent persons.All appointments in the Police Department in BPS-11 and above will be made on merit through the respective Provincial Public Service Commissions on the basis of competitive examinations.A modern, well-equipped, and citizen friendly Police holds key to fighting crime, maintaining peace and law and order in the society. Police shall be reformed to become a community-based Smart Police equipped with modern tools and technologies. Further, All police stations shall be converted into Model Police Stations in phase wise approch. Recruitment in Police shall be ensured on merit. Forensic investigation capability shall be developed in each district.
51
 National and provincial databases of criminals shall be built in coordination with NADRA. All SHOs and public dealing staff will be trained in people skills. Police and intelligence agencies cooperation shall be improved to prevent crimes and terrorism.Information Technology and e-Government:In the spirit of democratic governance, revolutionary polices and visionary approach, we will give very high priority to the Information and Communications Technology (ICT) sector. It is our belief that in today’s global economic and technological dynamics, ICT plays a vital role in national development, good governance, and public services. The world is evolving rapidly into a knowledge-based economy. Hence the ICT sector must become a primary sector at the national level. PML(N) will evolve an active ICT policy and a new ICT regulatory framework to create 1 million new direct and indirect jobs.The development of Pakistan into an information society and knowledge economy will be accomplished by building on and strengthening four pillars:a) Governanceb) Public Servicesc) Local Software Economy andd) Technology1. Governance – The public sector will play a major role as an enabler, producer and use of e/m applications and digital content through the following specific measures:a. Introduce and integrate ICT at the working and operational levels of all major ministries and departments. Operational efficiency of all major projects will be maximized through ICT.b. Establish an e-Government portal at federal and provincial levels and convert manual approval processes to automated processes thus reducing the ‘file culture’.
52
Use of ICT and automation will be a priority in law enforcement, judiciary, health, education, manufacturing, taxation and transportation sectors.c. Automate all citizens’ databases, including land and property records in an integrated manner to create a master database of citizens at the national level that contains all relevant information such as NADRA data, FBR data, land records, property data, vehicle ownership, and arms data. This will facilitate transition towards a documented economy and will significantly expand the tax net.d. Create and implement performance monitoring dashboards for all major ministries, provincial, district and city governments, and major national projects.e. Demonstrate respect for Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) at the government level, evolving legislation to protect IPR and ensuring enforcement of the relevant laws in letter and spirit.f. Create an autonomous organization to investigate and prevent cyber crimes.2. Public Services will be improved through the use of information technology by:a. Expanding access to knowledge through e-libraries, computer-based vocational trainings, online journals and periodicals.b. Bridging rural-urban digital divide by establishing 500 ICT centers in smaller cities and towns to reduce the knowledge gap and break rural isolation.c. Expanding IT labs and access to laptops in the education sector across Pakistan, as already demonstrated by PML(N) in Punjab.d. Promoting the use of e-Commerce and branch-less banking maximizing the online availability of information for citizens (such as crop & consumer price indexes for
53
farmers & citizens).e. Promoting and facilitating software industry to develop country-specific content for the customer to be accessed through 4G and Long Term Evolution (LTE) networks and other advanced technologies.f. Standardized information about public services will be made available through call centers and text messages, in addition to internet, to ensure widest access to citizens from all sections of society.g. Wide penetration of cell phones in all sections of society will be leveraged to proactively seek feedback from citizens, disseminate public service messages, and increase citizens engagement.3. Local Software Economy – Promote the local software industry to generate annual exports of at least US$ 10 billion by 2020:a. Revise IT curriculum in higher education to ensure that the students are imparted most advanced and relevant technology concepts, thus creating a pool of world-class workforce.b. Provide appropriate incentives to the hardware and software industry including start-up assistance to new software houses to promote entrepreneurship.c. Development of IT parks in major cities that will offer world-class infrastructure for IT companies to operate without any impediments to their business and facilitate interaction with academia, industry and other stakeholders.d. Position Pakistan as a destination of choice in the region for offshore ICT business establishment and investors.e. When appropriate, include a ‘technology transfer’ and ‘percentage local development and content’ clause in future government projects.f. Adherence to relevant international ICT standards will be ensured with regards to certification and processes.
54
4. Technology Dissemination – A comprehensive programme will be launched to ensure fast track induction of modern ICT technologies through:a. Frog leap from 2.5G to 4G/LTE. The window of opportunity to deploy 5 year old 3G has passed.b. Develop a network of (renewable energy-based) kiosks in rural communities and poor urban centers to facilitate access to information (agriculture prices for farmers) and facilitate e-commerce.c. Leverage ICT R&D fund to establish Centers of Excellence in different universities to foster research and innovation.d. Improve the working of the Universal Services Fund (USF) and utilize its resources to bridge rural-urban digital divide and establish Wi-Fi hotspots.e. Unplug the unique interactive quality of Social Media to promote innovation, collaboration and entrepreneurship by engaging, soliciting ideas, listening and learning from customers, suppliers, employees and all sectors of society. Promote strategic adoption of social media by businesses, organizations and government institutions to improve discrete functions and practices and remain relevant to all their stakeholders.Through these programmes every effort will be made to reduce the digital divide between urban and rural areas and enhance access to government services and business opportunities in all parts of Pakistan as an important component of democratic governance.
55
ScienceandTechnology
56
Science and TechnologyThe Science and Technology (S&T) policy represents a strategic shift from the prevailing piece-meal approach to a holistic S&T strategy. Focus will be on the rapid development of human resources and providing meaningful employment to a growing young, educated segment of the population: Improved communication, coordination and collaboration among S&T, ICT and other sectors of socio-economic development. Immediate ‘Innovation Incubators’ at each major school of Science & Technology and medicine. ‘Holistic Technology Clusters’ in every major city of every province within 5-years. Relevant R&D through international collaboration. Create one million new jobs within 5-years that enhance socio-economic development.In addition to the traditional fields of Science & Technology, the policy focus represents a paradigm shift in Research & Development in emerging technologies and its strategic exploitation through commercialisation opportunities to create new companies, new solutions and new jobs. The policy focus is on ensuring that Pakistan acquires world-class expertise within 5-years in at least the following emerging technologies: Nanotechnology and Biotechnology Fuel Cell Technology Renewable Energy Technologies Satellite and Satellite launch technologyNanotechnology and Biotechnology Revolution through International CollaborationNanotechnology and Biotechnology encompass fields as diverse as Material Sciences, Medicine, Agriculture, Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
57
Engineering, Electronics and Energy. Policy focus will be on the rapid development of human resources: Establish priority research areas for a Ten- Year Plan for Nano & Biotechnology (TYPNB), keeping in perspective its long term benefits to other socio-economic sectors and relevance to international collaboration. R&D and commercialization are an expensive proposition. Therefore, focus will be on international public-private collaboration and alliances with strategic partners, from developing and developed nations, keen to exploit the availability of low-cost R&D human resources. Establish the Pakistan Foundation for Nanotechnology (PFN) and Pakistan Foundation for Biotechnology (PFB). Establish a network of interdisciplinary Laboratories and Innovation Incubators located on the campus of each major school of Science & Technology and medicine. Innovation Incubators to help entrepreneurs develop a large number of companies through an ecosystem that provides free development space, commercialisation guidance from industry, business schools, and venture capitalists. Move successful innovations from Incubators to ‘Holistic Technology Clusters’ to promote growth and collaboration with other sectors.Fuel Cell TechnologyPolicy focus on ensuring Pakistan developing world class expertise by 2020 towards a Hydrogen Economy: Fuel Cell Technology Research & Development and application. Fuel Cell Technology based Product innovation, development & manufacture & export.Develop International Commercial Satellite Launch Capability:Policy focus on Public Private Sector Collaboration between Industry
58
and Defence services to exploit the investments and technological advances already made in the defence sector and apply them to commercial sectors. This has already been successfully implemented by many developed and developing nations to achieve strategic advances, and create jobs: Exploit the existing indigenous expertise in missile, solid fuel, launch and command, control communication systems technologies of the National Development Complex to develop an indigenous satellite design and commercial launch capability.An Early Warning System is required to be put in place an adequate framework for monitoring and prevention of crises and for relief operations. This system will be able to alert the executive, policy and law makers in time to tackle the emerging crisis and help take preventive measures. Spin-off Satellite Design and Commercial Satellite Launch capabilities to exploit the commercial satellite launch market that is projected to exceed $100 billion in this decade and currently suffers from massive backlog due to insufficient capacity.Renewable Energy Technologies:Ensure Pakistan develops world class expertise by 2020 in traditional forms of renewable energy (Hydel, Wind, Solar, Micro, and Biogas). Immediate focus on Wind Turbine Technology to achieve strategic advances, create jobs and sustainable socio-economic benefits: Wind turbine technology is similar to jet engine technology that Pakistan already possesses at its National Development Complex. Exploit the existing indigenous expertise in aerospace to develop an indigenous commercial wind turbine innovation, development and manufacturing and export capability. Wind turbine market size is projected to grow rapidly and currently suffers from a massive backing due to insufficient worldwide capacity.
59
TheEmploymentChallenge
60
The Employment ChallengeA major aim of the socio-economic policies of PML(N) will be to expand employment opportunities in order to reduce poverty and at the same time ensure a fuller utilization of the country’s human resources for productive purposes. One of the main objectives of economic revival programme proposed in chapter 1 is to address the employment challenge facing the country. In addition, the following specific programmes and initiatives will be undertaken: A National Manpower Plan will be prepared to match the demand and supply of manpower and provide a basis for periodical adjustments in education and training programmes. New employment opportunities will be provided to over three million persons in the public and private sectors including 1 million each in IT sector and 1 million in SME sector. The minimum wage for workers will be gradually enhanced to Rs. 15,000 per month. Rights of workers will be ensured and the role of collective bargaining agents will be made more effective keeping in view the relevant ILO Conventions. A programme of vigorous industrialization and small and medium enterprises will be undertaken in the urban and rural areas to absorb unemployed labour. Maximum emphasis will be placed on the programmes of rural development to provide gainful opportunities for income and employment within the rural areas and curb the prevailing tendency of migration from urban to rural areas. The programme will include facilities for encouraging youth social entrepreneurship projects for disadvantaged youth. The taxation system will be modified to encourage rapid growth in investment, particularly in employment intensive activities. Employment opportunities for qualified doctors will be provided by constructing more hospitals, extending soft term, easy installment loans to doctors to establish them in private practice; and giving tax concessions for establishment and
61
expansion of private hospitals. A comprehensive programme will be implemented for the full absorption of engineers, scientists and other skilled manpower, including a new National Consultancy Policy for greater use of national consultants, strengthening and expansion of existing scientific institutions, creation of new institutes for modern technologies and making it obligatory for the private industrialists to hire adequate expertise in their respective fields. A programme for the development of technical skills to produce technically trained and employable manpower will be implemented. For this purpose, the intake of polytechnics and vocational schools will be expanded partly by introducing double shifts in the existing institutions and facilities for vocational training and computer literacy created in all high schools and colleges. Para-medical training institutions for females will be attached to each district and tehsil hospital and facilities for the training of female teachers will be expanded in all districts to meet the large demand for these personnel, particularly in rural areas. In the longer run, the employment challenge is closely linked to the rate at which the country’s population is growing. The annual average growth rate has slowed from 2.6 percent in the 1990s to about 2.0% in the past decade which is the highest in South Asia. PML(N) will strengthen the policy and advocacy components of the Population Welfare Programme and support Provincial efforts to integrate service delivery with the health infrastructure in the public and private sectors.Labour:The rights of labourers shall be protected. PML(N) will develop a skilled labour force to meet the challenges of a growing economy. Labour laws will be revised to ensure justice to all parties and to improve working relations and overall growth.‘Tripartite National and Provincial Productivity Council’ and ‘National
62
Health & Safety Council’ will be set up to raise and develop “productivity” and “preventive safer culture” in the country through joint efforts of the Government, Employer and Workers.Ensuring “Decent Work” for the national work force by ensuring fair wage and safe working condition to prevent accidents and occupational diseases at work place and provision of social protection.Overseas Pakistanis:PML(N) considers overseas Pakistanis are a major strategic asset of Pakistan. There are at least 8 million overseas Pakistanis who are playing an important role in the economic well being of Pakistan by remitting $ 12 billion every year. Given the right environment and special incentives, many overseas Pakistanis will be encouraged to invest their talent and resources in suitable ventures and products.PML(N) will ask Banks and DFIs to offer special products and financial instruments to provide secure and profitable avenues of investment to overseas Pakistanis. A certain percentage of public offerings of all new floatations will be reserved for overseas Pakistanis with the object of channeling at least 50% of annual remittances into productive investment. In addition PML(N) will take steps to: A special consultative mechanism called Overseas Pakistanis Business and Professional Forum will be set up as a permanent body to give a voice to overseas Pakistanis and enhance their role in the nation building process. Initiate a bank loans scheme for small to medium new business start-up, tax and duty holidays in industrial zones for those returning to Pakistan and desirous of setting up their own businesses. Undertake a campaign through relevant federal and provincial agencies to provide free certified vocational training to those intending to proceed abroad for employment on the basis of periodical surveys of skills required in different countries. This will advance their job prospects and better remuneration
63
through internationally acceptable certification programmes. Encourage highly skilled overseas Pakistanis to pay Government sponsored short visits to Pakistan to impart local training in their specialized fields. Improve remittance system through official banking channels through after-hours facilities and revising “Gold Card” rewards scheme. Grant voting rights to all overseas Pakistanis and dual-nationals. All CNIC and NICOP holders will be facilitated to register their votes with the Election Commission in order to vote in person or by a postal ballot system. Schools for overseas Pakistani children to be transformed into top quality education institutions. These shall be strengthened through merit based transparent appointments, management and infrastructure. Protection to property of Overseas Pakistanis will be provided against Qabza Mafias. Advisory Committees shall be set-up comprising of distinguished overseas Pakistanis. These committees will stay in close contact with the Pakistani embassies to resolve issues. Ambassadors will be directed to cooperate with the committees.
64
8Media, Art & Culture
65
MEDIAPML(N) recognizes media as the fourth pillar of democratic system.Freedom of media shall be respected and guaranteed.• Law to curb harassment of media shall be enacted.• A comprehensive insurance scheme shall be introduced to cover journalists against death and injury due to harassment in discharge of professional duties.• Fund for training of journalists shall be established.• PTV/PBC shall be made autonomous bodies.ART & CULTUREArt and culture are vital for quality of life and promote soft image of the country. Art is a source of ideas, inspiration and creative optical. PML (N) shall promote art and culture to project our cultural heritage at home and abroad.• Pakistan film and cinema industry is in crisis. Quality films will be encouraged to revive both the industries.• Art and cultural activities shall be promoted at all levels.• Fund shall be established to support new talent development• Existing art & cultural institutes shall be strengthened• Pakistani productions will be dubbed in international languages to project Pakistani culture abroad.• International level media cities shall be established.• Regional folk culture should be promoted to preserve the richness of Pakistani culture and heritage.• Promote creative activities in the educational institutions.
66
9A Charterfor Inter-ProvincialHarmony
67
A Charter for Inter-Provincial Harmony“If you do judge, judge between them justly. Allah loves the just.” (Surat al-Maida, 42)Pakistan is a federation and the harmonious interaction between its provinces and territories is critical for its progress. Stronger provinces can make a stronger federation since the federation is as good as the sum of its parts. Pakistan is blessed with various entities. In order to unite them, we need to strengthen them. PML(N) believes in maximum provincial autonomy for each province in accordance with the vision of the founding father and as set forth in the constitution.PML(N) is a national party with a strong belief in inter-provincial harmony and is committed to evolving a common national agenda to promote inter-provincial harmony. PML(N)’s Charter for Inter-Provincial Harmony has a two prong strategy; firstly the identification of certain initiatives which need to be undertaken across all provinces for equality, bonding, harmony and peace. Secondly certain initiatives, which are province specific so that the provinces can come at par with each other and become productive and healthy members of the federation. The definition of parts for PML(N) is specific. PML(N) technically considers Azad Jammu & Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan as provinces, equal to Punjab, Sindh, KPK and Balochistan.Following are the key elements of our Inter-provincial Charter which can bring harmony and make Pakistan a cradle for its people.1 - Maximum autonomy to provinces: Whilst all provinces have been granted additional autonomy through the 18th amendment, it has not been fully implemented. PML(N) will ensure that the autonomy envisaged in the 18th amendment is fully implemented in the shortest possible time. A parliamentary committee will be constituted to monitor and supervise this process. The functions, responsibilities and financial powers of the AJK and GB will be gradually brought at par with the provinces. The AJK/GB legislative assemblies will be empowered. The Council of Common Interests will meet as per its constitutional mandate.
68
Observer status will be given to territories on CCI, NFC and IRSA. A basic minimum criteria of good practices and values which are representative of the Federation and Pakistaniyat, will also be charted which will ensure that the provinces are woven together by shared values. This code will be known as the Pakistaniyat Code.2 - Fair Water Distribution PML(N) will ensure that the 1991 Water Accord is implemented in letter and spirit. IRSA will be restructured and strengthened to ensure neutrality and fair distribution of water as per 1991 Accord. PML(N) will curtail Intra-provincial water theft between head and tail farmers by canal lining and other measures. District wise monitoring committees will be set up to ensure reduction in water theft. No water projects will be commenced without consensus among all the concerned units of the Federation. Old and new affectees displaced by any water projects will be adequately compensated. All water projects will have environmental assessment reports presented to the CCI so that the environmental protection objectives are fully secured. Past royalty, boundary disputes on water projects between provinces will be taken to CCI for speedy resolution.3 - Inter-provincial Drainage Accord: There is much acrimony over how waste waters from certain provinces flow into others and destroy the lands in the receiving province. A fair accord between all provinces and territories will be carried out so as to dispose the waste waters without causing environmental and financial damage to any of the provinces/ territories. The financial responsibility for the treatment of waste water will lie onto the waste originating province/ territory. The age old practice of dumping waste into fresh water lakes would be stopped and such lakes will be rehabilitated. Villages on the borders of the Sindh, Baluchistan and Punjab where this waste causes much damage and the coastal belt of Sindh will be duly compensated and will have the right to petition.
69
 A special Inter-provincial Drainage Committee (IPDC) will monitor these problems and submit periodical reports to the IPCC and its parliamentary wing.4 - National Language Bill:Pakistan currently has many mother tongues but only one national language which is Urdu and one official language which is English. In most nation states all major mother tongues are national languages. A National Language Commission will be set up by the PML(N) government to develop criteria for giving the status of national language to all major languages.5 - Census:Just distribution and management of resources on the basis of correct and updated census data will create harmony. PML(N) will ensure that the census due since 2008 is carried out as early as possible and in time to facilitate delimitation based on new census data well before the next elections.6 - Truth and Reconciliation Commission:Trust and Reconciliation Commission will be established to discover and reveal the truth about past wrong-doings, acknowledge sufferings of victims and recommend, inter-alia, appropriate compensation / reparation to the victims and their families.7 - Inter-provincial Youth Programmes:Exchanges between youth of different provinces and job opportunities in public and private sector will be encouraged through the IP internship programme and the IP volunteer programme. Exchange of rural and urban youth will be undertaken to create a better understanding of our diversity being our strength. Culture and sports will be encouraged at an inter-provincial level.8 - Development Monitoring:Standardization of public sector services across all of Pakistan will be undertaken so that the quality of life in each province is not
70
so disparate. A process of accountability of all major development projects will be undertaken and all those found guilty of corruption during the building of public service facilities will be dealt with according to law.9 – Federal Government Job Quotas:These will be renewed for another 10 years based on backwardness criteria and all provinces and territories to be adequately represented in the Federal government. Fata and GB quotas will not be mixed. Meaningful representation of all territories / provinces in the higher cadre like federal secretaries, CEOs of SOEs, Ambassadors, Armed Forces, and Civil Armed Forces will be ensured.10 – Illegal Immigration and Border Control:All illegal immigrations from other countries will be stopped and NADRA data-basing of all citizens of Pakistan will be completed. Government writ will be established in all areas and there will be no “no-go-areas” which are beyond state radars.11 – New Provinces:A high powered Commission will be set up to evolve, through consensus, the criteria and the modalities for the creation of new provinces. PML(N) is committed to the creation of Hazara, South Punjab and Bahawalpur Provinces.12 – Media Strategy:The National Media Strategy will encourage Inter-provincial harmony through special programmes and regional media’s outreach will be increased.13-BalochistanPML(N) fully recognizes the gravity of situation and commits itself to win hearts and minds of the people of Balochistan through meaningful political dialogue and comprehensive programme to restore their political and economic rights. Such a programme will be evolved in consultation with all the political parties and stakeholders.
71
10Speedy andInexpensiveJustice
72
Speedy and Inexpensive JusticeTo carry forward the pivotal role played by PML(N) in the restoration of the superior judiciary in 2008-09, the PML(N) pledges to uphold the independence of the judiciary as guaranteed by the Constitution.Conscious of the mental and physical suffering of litigants whose cases linger over generations without final decision and firmly believing in the principle that ‘justice delayed is justice denied’, the PML(N) government will take all necessary measures to ensure the dispensation of speedy and inexpensive justice for the common man. This is not mere rhetoric. The PML(N) will initiate action in this regard immediately on coming into power so that benefits thereof accrue to the people as soon as possible. The strategy will be two-pronged:(1) reduce the huge pending backlog of cases at every level; and (2) provide justice at the proverbial ‘doorstep’.To accelerate disposal of cases, procedures will be greatly simplified. In particular, legislation will be enacted to provide that:(a) in civil cases, initial trial to be completed within one year, and appellate proceedings within the following year; and(b) in criminal cases, trial to be completed within six months and appeal be decided within one year.Such legislation will include provisions for day-to-day hearings and award of heavy costs for unjustified delays and frivolous litigation.The number of judges will be substantially increased. All vacancies will be filled on priority basis. New posts will be created keeping in view pendency of cases at different levels of the judicial hierarchy, the target being to enable an average case to pass through each level within one year. Judges (from the lawyer community) could be appointed on contract basis for a suitable period to help reduce backlog. Necessary support staff and infrastructure, including state-of-the-art equipment
73
and technology, will be provided. In consultation with the judiciary, arrangements will also be made for extended court hours / evening courts, where feasible.All judges and court officials will be required to undergo regular training courses to acquaint them with up to date laws and modern case flow management techniques, etc.In order to dramatically shorten time spent in litigation, the PML(N) government will request the Pakistan Law Commission to examine the feasibility of reducing the existing 4-tiers system (trial court, appellate court, High Court, Supreme Court) to 3-tiers (trial court, appellate/ High Court, Supreme Court), as in the case of special laws, e.g. banking, labour, and environmental laws. Under this radical reform, civil courts would be abolished and trial would start at the Additional District Judge level. This will not only reduce litigation time by several years, but will also improve the quality of judgments at the trial level.To reduce the volume of litigation, a major campaign to promote Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR) will be launched. This will include development of a culture of dispute settlement through negotiation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration or other ADR mode; creation of public awareness as to the laws and procedures relating to ADR; training and capacity-building of judicial officers and staff, and lawyers; introduction of the subject of ADR in law colleges; and establishment of ADR centers and panels to facilitate its adoption.The role of the Ombudsman will be strengthened and enhanced, to provide speedy relief in respect of public complaints regarding maladministration. Office of District Ombudsman will be established to provide relief at district level.In order to bring justice to the doorstep, village panchayats / jirgas (with clearly defined powers and jurisdiction, and qualifications for membership) will be revived for deciding cases relating to minor offences and civil cases involving minor disputes. Necessary arrangements will be made, in consultation with the Judiciary, to set up
74
courts at the municipal / union council level. Feasibility of establishment of High Court benches at divisional level will be discussed with the Bench and Bar.The Pakistan Code needs to be revised, updated and simplified so that the common man can easily understand and utilize laws which can cater to present-day requirements. For this purpose, the membership of the Pakistan Law Commission will be strengthened with eminent jurists, lawyers, government officers and members of civil society and entrusted with the task of reviewing all existing laws on the statute books and recommending, on a continuous monthly basis, over a period of 6 months:a) repeal of outdated laws which have become redundant;b) amendments in laws in the light of new trends, requirements and development; andc) consolidation of all laws on the same subject.Parliament will be requested to approve appropriate legislation in the light of these recommendations, and a new, updated Pakistan Code will be published and posted on the Law Ministry website. Prescribed forms and procedures, etc. will be highlighted to facilitate public access. Similar action will be taken in the Provinces.The PML(N) government will endeavor to draft laws after consultation with relevant stake-holders and, in order to ensure transparency and develop a broad-based consensus facilitating enforcement, will publicize the draft to invite public comments before finalization and tabling of the Bill in Parliament. Record relating to the public consultation will be submitted before the concerned Standing Committee when the Bill is taken up for consideration.
75
11CorruptionandAccountability
76
Corruption and Accountability“May the curse of Allah be upon the briber, the bribe recipient, and the mediator between them.” (Hadith)Corruption has reached record heights in recent years. The PML(N) Government will adopt a zero tolerance policy for corruption. It will take every measure to ruthlessly stamp out corruption wherever found. An autonomous National Accountability Commission which is administratively, functionally and financially independent, with comprehensive powers to carry out across-the-board accountability of all holders of public offices in a fair, impartial and transparent manner will be established.All holders of public offices will be required to file statements of assets and liabilities prior to assuming office and every year thereafter, which will be made available to the public and the concerned authorities for scrutiny.In line with the rich traditions of Islam and successful experiments in the developed countries, PML(N) will evolve a top-down, rule-based and merit-driven approach, to achieve the objectives of good governance, democratic rule and full protection of economic, social and human rights.The most effective way to stop corruption is by evolving a transparent and open system for every government department and organization, combined with a system of incentives for integrity and honesty. In this context the following measures will be adopted: To reduce opportunities for corruption and also to ensure decisions on merit, existing laws and rules will be amended to withdraw all discretionary powers wherever possible / practical and instead provide for exercise of powers in a fair, transparent and equitable manner. Freedom of Information Act will be passed in consultation
77
with media and other stakeholders to improve transparency in government in accordance with Article 19A of the Constitution. All curbs on freedom of the electronic and press media will be removed. Media will be encouraged to adopt and enforce its own Code of Conduct providing for strict adherence to high professional and ethical standards. To promote a culture of accountability, integrity and transparency, ‘whistle-blower’ protection law (public interest disclosure) will be enacted for providing safeguards to persons who expose corruption, wrongdoing and other illegalities. Procurement Laws and Rules will be strengthened, requiring all public sector organizations to publish all tenders and related bidding documents online, post their development/ procurement budgets on their websites, along with details of expenditure over one million rupees, enabling any person to ‘follow the money’ all tenders and documents required to participate in an auction will be made available online. In order to arrest and reverse rising trend of land-grabbing and encroachments, and deter / punish ‘kabza mafia’, existing laws will be strengthened and strictly enforced.
78
12ForeignPolicy andNationalSecurity
79
Foreign Policy and National SecurityA coherent, well-formulated and popularly supported foreign policy is essential, especially in this age of globalization, when new and daunting challenges have emerged. Foreign policy cannot be seen in isolation, for it is only a reflection of a country’s domestic policy. The two are linked inextricably, as foreign policy cannot be effective and credible, unless backed by a domestic policy that promotes harmony and good governance at home.Pakistan today is at war within, while isolated abroad. Its independence and sovereignty stand compromised; its economic weaknesses are forcing us to go begging bowl in hand, while foreign states undertake unilateral strikes on its territory and non-state actors use it as a sanctuary to pursue their own agendas, oblivious to Pakistan’s national interests.Consequently, a deep malaise afflicts the country; its social, economic and political schisms creating grave doubts and misgivings even in the minds of our friends. The reasons are many and complex, but primarily it is our failure to build a democratic, progressive, tolerant Islamic state, as envisioned by Allama Iqbal and the Quaid-e-Azam.This is all the more unfortunate as Pakistan is located at an important junction of South Asia, West Asia, and Central Asia. The country could be a bridge between energy rich Central Asia and Iran on one side and energy deficit countries like China and India on the other. Pakistan’s coastal belt facilitates access to warm waters and oil rich Gulf, as well as international oil supply lines passing through the Strait of Harmuz. Pakistan can also develop a flourishing transit economy because it provides the shortest land routes from Western China to the Arabian Sea, through the Gwadar Port, while linking India with Afghanistan and CAR and providing land route from Iran to India and access to the Central Asian Republics to the Arabian Sea and India for oil/gas pipelines.To take advantage of these assets and opportunities, the PML(N) is committed to a thorough and comprehensive review of our national security and foreign policy, to bring it in consonance with the hopes and
80
aspirations of the people. To this end, PMIL(N) will undertake the following initiatives and measures:i) In consonance with the Quaid-e-Azam’s belief in good relations with all countries, the PML(N) will make concerted efforts to enhance and strengthen Pakistan’s relations with its proven and time-tested friends, to make them truly strategic. At the same time, it will pursue a policy of normalization with countries with which we have differences, so as to seek their resolution by means of peaceful negotiations, with the objective of establishing cordial and cooperative ties with all countries, especially those that are our neighbors.ii) To protect its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, Pakistan will strengthen and enhance friendly relations and deep rooted economic ties with all countries of the world, as well as with important international economic blocks, such as the EU, ECO, SAARC, ASEAN and SCO.iii) It will accord the highest priority to strengthening the nation’s defenses. For this purpose, the needs and requirements of our Armed Forces would be met, under all circumstances.iv) Pakistan’s strategic assets, acquired with the nation’ s blood and sweat and in the face of grave international threats and pressures, would be protected and improved to ensure strategic parity in the region.v) It would be ensured that the formulation and determination of the nation’s foreign policy remains the sole preserve of its elected representatives, while the implementation and execution shall be assigned to relevant departments and agencies by the Federal Cabinet.vi) For purposes of regular and systematic coordination and consideration of all matters related to national security, a Cabinet Committee on Defense and National Security, to be headed by the Prime Minister and assisted by a Permanent Secretariat, will
81
be established to maintain democratic oversight of all aspects of foreign, defense and national security policies.vii) The PML(N) will ensure that all institutions, whether civil or military, including those dealing with security and/or intelligence matters, act in accordance with the law, and under the instructions and directives of the Federal Cabinet.viii) Special efforts will be made to resolve the issue of Jammu and Kashmir, in accordance with the provisions of the relevant UN resolutions and the 1999 Lahore Accord and in consonance with the aspirations of the people of the territory for their inherent right of self-determination.ix) The issue of “water management” in the context of relations with neighboring countries and the proper utilization of river resources by the countries through which these rivers flow, will be accorded the urgency and importance that it deserves.x) Our role and performance in the United Nations and other international organizations would be improved and enhanced, in recognition of the importance we attach to multilateral diplomacy.xi) Since political ties can become durable, sustainable and mutually beneficial only when reinforced by economic and commercial linkages, the PML(N) will accord special importance to the promotion of external trade and encouragement of foreign investment. To this end, an institutional relationship will be created to ensure close coordination among the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Commerce and Economic Affairs.xii) In recognition of foreign policy’s key role in ensuring the sovereignty of the state and the well-being of its people, it shall be the PML(N)’s endeavor to build a cadre of highly competent, dedicated, well-trained professionals to man the Foreign Ministry and our Diplomatic Missions. A special reform effort will be made to enhance the effectiveness of our diplomatic missions and
82
re-orient it to words promotion of economic, commercial and investment policies.xiii) The PML(N) will make full use of the country’s think tanks, which will be strengthened and improved, while instituting regular consultations with elected representatives, defense analysts, media personalities and retired diplomats, to take advantage of their experiences and understanding of national security issues.
83
13MilitancyandTerrorism
84
Militancy and Terrorism“Whoever kills another one without justifiable cause, surely he is killing all of humanity. And whoever saves the life of another one, surely he saves the lives of all of humanity.” (Sura Al Ma’aidah: Ayah 32)The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 and the consequent use of Islam to galvanize Muslims the world over to oppose foreign occupation of that country, followed by long years of civil war and unrest there, have all had a deep impact on Pakistan’s polity and society. In fact, no other country has suffered more and sustained greater losses than Pakistan, because of the events in Afghanistan.However, until September 11, 2001 and the US military invasion of Afghanistan, the phenomenon of Talibanization and militancy had been largely confined to that war-ravaged country. In subsequent years, the intense outrage with U.S. policies in Afghanistan, coupled with an unrepresentative, authoritarian rule in Pakistan resulted in political servitude, economic deprivation, neglect of the tribal areas and finally, jihadi rhetoric that served to encourage and embolden the militants in Pakistan.The PML(N) is convinced that militancy and terrorism have no place in Pakistan; neither the laws of the country nor the religious beliefs or the cultural traditions of its citizens sanction use of violence against fellow humans. The Party therefore, declares unequivocally that it rejects militancy and extremism, while condemning terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations. There is no justification for acts of violence, irrespective of any pretext or provocation. Long years of authoritarian rule which repressed the opposition distorted political activity and denied civil rights to the people, generated widespread anger and frustration, which may have encouraged some to opt for violence.Nevertheless, neither militancy nor terrorism can be countered by mere use of force. This is a problem that has penetrated deep into the vitals of society and therefore needs a well-thought out, comprehensive and sustainable plan of action that should include economic, social, administrative and political initiatives and measures to root out this
85
menace. Some of the steps envisaged by PML(N) are:i) Integration of the Federally and Provincially Administered Tribal Areas into the country’s political mainstream, by extending to its people the political rights enjoyed by the citizens of Pakistan.ii) Establishment of schools and technical centers to create a pool of skilled manpower, not only for local enterprises, but for manpower export to friendly countries.iii) Extending free health benefits to the disadvantaged classes, by providing mobile health units in these areas.iv) A crash program to establish small and medium size industrial enterprises in the Tribal Areas that could provide gainful employment to the youth, making them stake-holders in peace and security of these areas.v) Extending special facilities for technical education to the female population of the area, so as to empower them economically and socially.vi) Undertaking massive public education campaigns to create an alternate narrative to sustain efforts against terrorism and bring home the message that Islam is a religion of peace and that there is no moral or religious sanction for violence or extremism.vii) Undertaking education reforms that will aim at eliminating different systems of education in the country, while ensuring that the Madrassahs too, follow the same syllabi as the government schools.Simultaneously there is an urgent need to amend anti-terrorism laws and related legislation to provide for appropriate standards of evidence, efficient prosecution and protection of judges and witnesses. It is equally important to overhaul and modernize the security sector in order to establish democratic and parliamentary oversight on intelligence services and to achieve better surveillance, improved coordination among intelligence agencies and enhanced capacity for counter insurgency forces at different levels.
86
14Implementation on Constitution
87
 Implementation on ManifestoPML(N) has already demonstrated, during both its earlier tenures, its commitment and ability to implement the policies and the programmes promised in its election manifestos.An essential pre-requisite for such a noble compact between a political party and its voters is the realism and practical feasibility of the policies and programmes included in Party’s Manifesto. This Manifesto fully meets this criterion.The second important dimension is detailed and timely home work for an implementation road map. For this purpose PML(N) has already set up Sub–Committees on different subsectors or issues consisting of all the stakeholders to work out detailed implementation plans with cost estimates and a realistic time frame. These arrangements will ensure that by the time PML(N) receives the mandate of the people for the next five years, these plans are ready for implementation.In line with the practice followed in its previous two terms, PML(N) will ensure submission of periodic reports to the cabinet on the implementation of the Manifesto by a special cabinet sub-committee.
88
15Annexures
89
AnnexuresA PML(N)’s Achievements in its First Tenure (November 1990 – April 1993)B PML(N)’s Achievements in its Second Tenure (February 1997 – October 1999)C PML(N)’s Struggle for DemocracyD PML(N)’s Achievements in Punjab (2008–2012)E The Manifesto Committee
90
Annexure APML(N)’s Achievements in its First Tenure (November 1990 – April 1993)PMl(N)’s first tenure lasted for only two and a half years, from November 1990 to April, 1993, it will be remembered for its wide ranging reforms and far reaching decisions as listed below: A major programme of deregulation was implemented to abolish the import licensing system, remove restrictions on the movement of foreign exchange and grant new incentives for local and foreign investment in industries. The telecommunication sector was opened to private investment which led to doubling of telephone connections within two years, from 800,000 in 1991 to 1.7 million in 1993 (and 4 million by 1999), thus virtually eliminating the long waiting list for telephone connections. The first fiber optic infrastructure for telecommunication was also installed during this period. The Power Generation capacity was increased from 9,770 MW in June 1990 to 10,600 MW in June 1993 with 1.5 million new electricity connections. A major hydel power project i.e. Ghazi Barotha with a capacity of 1,400 MW was also approved during this period. An agreement was also signed with China for the first 300 MW Chashma Nuclear Power Project. In the road infrastructure sub-sector, apart from dualizing N-5 National Highway between Peshawar and Karachi, the construction of first motorway in South Asia (M-2 from Lahore to Islamabad) was started in 1992 and completed in November 1997. Intensive work was undertaken to set up a major port at Gwadar on the Makran Coast along with a coastal road to connect Gwadar to Karachi. After completing a modern airport at Karachi, the project to construct the Allama Iqbal International Airport at Lahore was also approved during this period.
91
 To initiate reversal of the disastrous consequences of the policy to nationalize the banking sector in 1974, two of the five nationalized banks (MCB and ABL) were privatized in 1991. In addition, major reforms were introduced to allow 10 new banks and 20 investment companies in the private sector in 1992. At that time, the Pakistani rupee was the strongest currency in South Asia. The Water Accord of March 1991 not only resolved a 70-year old dispute regarding the apportionment of the waters of the Indus system but also opened the door for taking up many new water development projects which had been held in abeyance because of this dispute. The NFC Award 1991 was also the first award after 17 years, announced by a democratically elected government on the basis of inter-provincial consensus. Under this Award, the payment of net hydel project to NWFP and other Provinces was started for the first time to implement Article 161 of the Constitution. Similarly, Baluchistan started receiving surcharge levied on natural gas from 1991 onwards. The allocations for social sectors i.e. primary education, primary health care, drinking water schemes and population welfare programme were more than doubled under the Social Action Programme launched in 1992. A major programme of distributing state land to the landless haaris of Sindh was initiated in 1992.As a result of these far-reaching reforms, Pakistan achieved the highest ever growth rate of 7.7% in 1991-92, the stock market capital quadrupled and the investment: GDP ratio crossed the 20% mark for the first time. Over 200 new companies were listed on the Karachi Stock Exchange during that period. The economy today would have been much stronger if the government had been allowed to complete its tenure and undertake the next phase of its reforms programme.
92
Annexure BPML(N)’s Achievements in its Second Tenure (February 1997 – October 1999)In the second aborted tenure of the PML(N) Government, from February 1997 to October 1999, the overall investment climate was adversely affected by many external factors like the Asian Economic Crisis of 1997 and the international sanctions imposed on Pakistan in June 1998 after the nuclear tests. Nevertheless, the government boldly took up the unfinished agenda of its earlier tenure, with many notable achievements to its credit: In April 1997, a new incentive package was announced for the agriculture sector to improve the terms of trade for the sector by ensuring that the prices paid by the farmers for inputs were in line with the prices they received for their crops. The support price of wheat was raised by 40%, resulting in a bumper crop of 22 million tons two years later, yielding an exportable surplus of 3 million tons. In May 1997, far-reaching capital market reforms were announced to convert the outdated Corporate Law Authority into a Security and Exchange Commission with new powers to regulate the capital markets, oversee the modernization of the stock exchanges and broaden the investor base. In June 1997, significant reforms were announced in banking and financial sector to turn around sick public sector banks, accelerate the process of financial liberalization, expand reliance on market-based instruments and strengthen the autonomy of the State Bank of Pakistan. In the next few weeks, five major laws were passed or amended by Parliament to give effect to these reforms. Leading Pakistani professionals were appointed as CEOs in these banks, government directors were withdrawn from the three remaining government-owned banks, which succeeded in reducing the portfolio of stuck up loans by Rs. 28 billion and also increased their profits. In 1998, Pakistan 2010 Program was launched to transform Pakistan’s
93
economy into a knowledge economy that is knowledge-led, globally competitive, robust, just and enterprising. Pakistan’s first national IT policy was launched to transform Pakistan into major information super power. The system of special import permits was abolished including duty-free import of 3,000 CC vehicles for VIPs. Discretionary powers for allocation of textile quotas were abolished, and a transparent system of public auction was introduced resulting in a 450% of increase in revenues. The oppressive system of octroi and zila taxes was abolished and local authorities were provided corresponding resources. The requirement of obtaining a license for keeping a radio was also abolished. Loans of widows with no income or property were written-off in a transparent manner. The Population Census which was due in 1991 was delayed due to the controversy generated by the exaggerated figures of housing census in October 1991. The PML(N) Government took up the challenge and conducted a highly successful and peaceful census in March 1998. The results were also a pleasant surprise. The total population in 1998 was 132 million and not 140 million as projected, showing a much-needed slow-down in the rate of population growth. One important byproduct of the census was NADRA, the National Database and Registration Authority. The census form had been redesigned to include 33 questions to provide a national database. NADRA was set up in April 1998, to take over and process all the data forms. The Authority has not only been issuing Computerized ID Cards, but is also providing a wide range of services to the government and the public.The most outstanding achievement of the PML(N) Government, in its second tenure was the historic decision to carry out nuclear tests in May 1998, with far-reaching domestic, regional and international consequences. Pakistan became the seventh nuclear nation of the World and restored its strategic balance with India.
94
Annexure CPML(N)’s Struggle for DemocracyApart from assigning highest priority to socio-economic development in order to improve the living standards of the common man and to achieve greater self-reliance, PML(N) has also played an historic role in strengthening democratic institutions and traditions: The defiant speech of Mr. Nawaz Sharif on 17 April 1993 transformed PML(N) into a vibrant anti establishment party committed to democracy and the rule of law. The courageous role of PML(N) as the main opposition Party from 1993 to 1996 boosted its popularity to such an extent that the Party won nearly 70% of the seats in the National Assembly in the February 1997 elections, while PPP’s seats went down from 86 to 18, confined only to Sindh Province. The determination shown by the government in carrying out nuclear tests, despite intense international pressures and subsequent efforts to adjust the civil-military power equation in favour of Parliament, led to its dismissal in October 1999. The leadership did not yield on principles and accepted imprisonment and prolonged exile. PML(N) leadership and workers courageously fought martial law regime from 1999 to 2008 with thousands of workers jailed. The principled democratic struggle culminated in ouster of Gen. Musharraf from power and foiled conspiracy to grant him indemnity for 3 November, 2007 emergency. The culmination of the struggle for strengthening the main pillar of democracy i.e. the Judiciary, came on 16 March 2009, when PML(N) lent its strength to the movement for the restoration of judges deposed by General Pervez Musharraf in November 2007. The role played by the Judiciary since then, in checking corruption and in protecting human rights and provincial rights in the country, has been appreciable and gratifying.
95
These reforms and policies undertaken or sponsored by PML(N) constitute a major transformation in economic policies and political structure of the country. This record also shows that contrary to the common perception that political parties do not implement their Manifestos, PML(N) in both its tenures substantially fulfilled the promises it made to the people of Pakistan. PML(N) is determined to complete this unfinished agenda for real change, under the mandate granted to it by the electorate.
96
Annexure DPML(N)’s Achievements in Punjab (2008–2012)The PML(N) government assigned highest priority to socio-economic development in Punjab to improve the living standards of the common man with special focus on poverty alleviation, bringing the deprived segments into the main stream and focusing on the less developed areas of Punjab especially Southern Punjab. In addition ensuring good governance has been a key priority of the Government. A summary of the main achievements of the Punjab Government during the period March 2008 to September 2012 is presented below: Education had been a key priority area. Schemes like Danish Schools at six locations and distribution of 125,000 laptops to top students are unique in nature as these as aimed at providing equal opportunity to children from low income families. Other activities include IT labs in 4,286 schools, initiation of Punjab Educational Endowment Fund, recruitment of teachers through competitive examinations on open merit. In Vocational & Technical Education, the provincial capacity has more than doubled in the last two years and now over 130,000 skilled workers are getting jobs annually. Ashiyana Housing Scheme was introduced by the government to provide opportunities for low income people to own their house and pay the cost in easy installments. PML(N) government has taken up several projects to improve transportation systems with enhanced commuting networks. Schemes like Bus Rapid Transport System, Yellow Cab Scheme will bring major relief to the people. Similarly, Lahore Kasur Road, multiple flyovers in Lahore, Multan, Rawalpindi and Bahawalpur, and completion of Multan Road and Circular Road has reduced congestion on these roads. Provision of better medical facilities to the masses is another priority of the Punjab Government. Many reforms have been
97
made in the health system for making it poor friendly. Besides this comprehensive and practical measures have been taken for up gradation of the existing infrastructure. Availability of doctors along with modern medical equipment has been ensured in these hospitals. Health budget has been increased manifolds in the last 4 years. Mobile health units have been launched in remote districts of Punjab to provide affordable and timely healthcare facilities to the poor segment of the society. Four new medical colleges are being set up in Sialkot, Sahiwal and D.G.Khan. An increase of 482 seats in the existing medical colleges has been achieved. Emergency measures to control epidemic of Dengue have been taken to control the Dengue fever. Punjab was worst hit by the floods in 2010. The PML(N) government ensured that all the affected people are rehabilitated in the shortest possible time. 22 Model Villages with all basic facilities were constructed in the affected areas of Southern Punjab and all possible help was offered by the government to affected people. Also, Command and Communications Center was set up in Punjab Disaster Management Authority for taking rapid action during floods. The PML(N) government has announced comprehensive and long-term reform package for the empowerment of women in the social, economic and legal fields by providing them their legitimate rights and including them in the process of development and progress of the nation. Under the package, the condition and transfer of land, among heirs in rural areas has been waived to eliminate the possibilities of usurpation of ancestral property of women, provision of Form-B has been made mandatory, 33% quota for women has been fixed in all government institutions, commercial loans for women entrepreneurs worth Rs. 2 billion has been set up. Similarly, special economic zones and industrial estates have been set up for the promotion of foreign and local investments. CM Punjab has visited China, Iran and Turkey to promote foreign
98
investment in Punjab. Various government sectors and private sector investors have been persuaded to come and invest in Punjab. A good example of these efforts is the setting up of the Lahore Waste Management Company, the BRT system. The present era is known as an era of diplomacy and investment. Punjab Board of Investment and Trade has been set up in Punjab to provide facilitation and promotion of foreign investments in Punjab. Multiple industrial estates are being constructed in Faisalabad, Multan, Rahim Yar Khan, Bhalwal, Vehari, and along the Motorway to encourage industrialization in Punjab. This will generate thousands of jobs for skilled and semi-skilled workers in Punjab. A self-employment scheme for unemployed skilled youth of Punjab has been launched in 2011 with an initial capital of Rs. 1 billion. Short term (2 years) interest-free loans of up to Rs.50,000 are being given to skilled workforce encouraging them to become entrepreneurs. Additional funds are being provided to this scheme to increase its reach to rural areas of Punjab. Lahore Meat Processing Complex has been setup as a joint project of Punjab Agriculture Meat Company and Mashad Meat Industrial Complex of Iran. This is a state-of-the-art slaughter house and meat processing facility having capacity to handle 1,000 large and 10,000 small animals on a daily basis. Halal meat will be provided to local and international markets from this facility. In addition to this, Punjab Livestock and Dairy Development Board has been set up to enhance the milk and meat production of Punjab. Punjab Forensic Science Agency is the second largest and modern agency in South Asia. This lab would go a long way in providing assistance in scientific based investigations into heinous crimes, besides providing provision of prompt justice, detection and arrest of criminals and for the eradication of crime from Punjab. Very soon a start of the art DNA Index system is being added to this laboratory. Model bazaars were setup in all the districts of Punjab to provide
99
affordable shopping facilities to the low income families in Punjab. So six bazaars are functional and remaining under construction. Citizen Feedback Model, the first such effort in the world, has been introduced in all districts in targeted services of revenue, police and healthy departments to fight petty corruption, increase citizen engagement and enhance monitoring of day to day service delivery. Pakistan’s first 27 km Mass Transit Project (Metro Bus Service) was successfully launched in Lahore, in a record period of 11 months with a cost of Rs. 29.7 billion.
100
Annexure EThe Manifesto Committee1. Mr. Sartaj Aziz (Former Finance Minister / Foreign Minister)2. Senator Mohammad Ishaq Dar (Former Finance Minister / Federal Minister of Commerce)3. Sardar Mehtab Ahmad Khan, MNA (Former Chief Minister Khyber Pakhtunkhwa)4. Mr. Mamnoon Hussain (Former Governor Sindh)5. Mr. Ahsan Iqbal (MNA, Former Dy. Chairman Planning Commission)6. Khawaja Muhammad Asif (MNA, Former Chairman Privitisation Board)7. Khawaja Saad Rafiq (MNA, Former Federal Minister Youth Affairs)8. Mr. Shahid Khaqan Abbasi (MNA, Former Minister Commerce)9. Mr. Zahid Hamid (MNA, Former Law Minister)10. Mr. Khurram Dastgir Khan (MNA)11. Sardar Ayaz Sadiq (MNA)12. Lt.Gen.(R) Abdul Qadir Baluch (MNA, Former Governor Balochistan)13. Mr. Baligh-ur-Rahman (MNA)
101
14. Pervaiz Rashid (Former Chairman PTV)15. Ch. Mohammad Jaffar Iqbal (Former Dy. Speaker National Assembly)16. Lt. Gen. (R) Salahuddin Tirmizi17. Nuzhat Aamir Sadiq (Senator)18. Anusha Rahman Khan (MNA)19. Dr. Raheela Magsi (MNA)20. Mr. Tariq Fatemi (Former Secretary Foreign Affairs)21. Mr. Arsala Khan Hoti22. Mr. Faisal Ijaz Khan23. Mr. Ismail Miftah (Industrialist and Energy Expert)Co-opted Members24. Mr. Humayun Akhtar Khan (Former Minister Commerce)25. Tariq Azeem Khan (Former Minister of State for Information & Broadcasting)26. Razina Alam Khan (Senator)27. Ms. Marvi Memon (Former MNA)28. Gen.(R) Abdul Qayyum (Former Chairman POF Wah / Pakistan Steel Mills)29. Mr. Isphanyar M. Bhandara, Industrialist
102
30. Mr. Umar Masoud Faruki31. Mr. Mohammad Zubair (Economist)32. Mr. Kamal Ahmad (IT Expert)33. Mr. Siddiq-ul-Farooq (Member / Secretary, Former Chairman House Building Finance Corporation)
103
Notes
104
105
